# Didda, Controversial Queen Of Kashmir

Created: 28/07/2022 11:11

#article #indian-history #kashmir-history

Source: [[Archana Garodia Gupta]] : [Swarajmag article about Didda](https://swarajyamag.com/magazine/didda-controversial-queen-of-kashmir) [Pocket link](https://getpocket.com/read/907232597)

**This article is a comprehensive summary of Didda's life.**

## My thoughts
- "In the 4th and 5th century CE, hundreds of Kashmiri missionaries like the venerated Kumarajiva... and **converted China to Buddhism**". Were we the same as the British? sending missionaries to spread our religion. What is the difference between us and the Europeans because we too ruled over South-East Asia in the past(Chola expansion to South-East Asia)? #indian-colonialism #indian-missionaries #china-conversion-buddhism
- The [[Abrahmic religions]] believe that their god is supreme and superior. Their religion is the only true religion and all other are false religions. We Indian preach that all paths lead to the same [[Brahma]], don't we also inherently believe that our philosophy is superior than that of the others!
- “The country where a woman, a child or a gambler rulers, sinks helplessly as a stone raft in the river.” - does [[Mahabharat]] really say this and if yes then in what context?
- [[Samgramaraja]] defeated [[Mahmud of Ghazni]] when the latter tried to invade Kashmir. *Why don't we learn about this in our history classes? The historians never forget to mention how [[Muhammad of Ghor]] defeated [[Prithviraj Chauhan]], or how [[Mahmud of Ghazni]] looted the [[Somnath Temple]] but not this, WHY?* #biased-history #flaws-of-education-system

## Fleeting Notes
- "A brief backgrounder on Kashmir. It had been a major intellectual centre for Buddhism, especially under [[Kanishka]]. In the 4th and 5th century CE, hundreds of Kashmiri missionaries like the venerated [[Kumarajiva]], travelled up the Karakoram silk route and **converted China to Buddhism**. In the 6th century, Kashmir was devastated by the [[Hun ruler Mihirakula]] who persecuted Buddhism and encouraged Shaivism. In the 8th century, the Shaiva king [[Lalitaditya Muktapida]] created a brief pan-Indian empire, where he raided as far as Assam, Afghanistan, Tibet, the Vindhyas, Gujarat and Sindh. He even had diplomatic relations with the Chinese emperor, and actually offered to host 200,000 Chinese troops in Kashmir to fight the Tibetans, their common enemy."
- "...women ruling was not supported either by Hindu or Buddhist scripture, the [[Mahabharat]] saying: “The country where a woman, a child or a gambler rulers, sinks helplessly as a stone raft in the river.”"
- "Kalhana mentions two queens who ruled before [[Didda]]...One was the mythical Yashomati, who was supposedly crowned by Krishna himself... The other woman ruler was just 50 years before [[Didda]]: **Sugandhadevi** ruled at the beginning of the 10th century as a regent and then directly, but just for two years. *Coins minted by her say **Sri Sugandhadeva, rather than “devi”**. **She was overthrown and executed by her courtiers.***"
- "In 950 CE, the ancient and powerful Hindu Shahi dynasty was ruling Kapisa (Kabul) and Gandhara (it was destroyed by Mahmud of Ghazni 50 years later). King Bhima Shahi’s daughter was married to Simharaja, the king of Lohara (currently Lohrin in Poonch). Simharaja had a beautiful but physically disabled daughter, [[Didda]] (b 924?). She is often referred to as Charanhina (footless) in Rajatarangini."
- "..Kashmir, which was now restricted to the Jhelum valley, was in turmoil. The **Damara**s, feudal landlords, and the Tantrins, hired soldiers, changed allegiance and constantly rebelled. Kings and dynasties lasted but a few years."
- "The people were left to the tender mercies of the officials. As [[Kalhana]] puts it: “Truly, government servants are a plague to the people and harass them like cholera or dysentery.” Some things are slow to change! 
  
  **Parvagupta**, a minister, had crowned himself in 949, killing the boy king **Samgramadeva** and throwing his body in the Jhelum, weighted down with a stone. He however died painfully of dropsy within a year, leaving the throne to his son **Kshemagupta**. **Kshemagupta** was pleasure-loving and dissolute. He was addicted to women, gambling, and especially to hunting jackals in the woods.  
  
  He was now looking for political legitimacy for his rule, and offered to marry the disabled and not-so-young [[Didda]], who had the qualification of being the granddaughter of the Shahis.

   The wedding took place in 950 CE and [[Didda]] came to Kashmir, to beautiful Shrinagara. Surprisingly, her husband came under her spell so visibly that he started being called “Diddakshema” by the populace, though not very kindly. The infatuated Kshemagupta actually got coins minted with “Di(dda) Kshemagupta Deva” inscribed on them : it is quite rare to find a husband adding his wife’s name to his own! *Didda’s influence however created enemies for her, especially the well-entrenched **prime minister Phalguna**, whose daughter Chandralekha was also married to Kshemagupta.*"
- "In 958, Kshemagupta contracted a violent fever during one of his beloved jackal hunts. He was taken to the Kshemamatha in **Varahamula (Baramulla)** and died there."
- "Didda immediately secreted away her son, in case he was killed. She was now on her own, surrounded by threats to her own life and to her son’s. The first challenge came when the courtiers gathered for the funeral, and there was great pressure on [[Didda]] to commit **sati** along with the other queens who included Phalguna’s daughter. She refused, saying she had to live to protect her son. **Abhimanyu** was then crowned and she became the regent.

   **Prime minister Phalguna**, fearing for his life, fled to Poonch. Didda now had to rule the kingdom. She was suspicious of everybody, especially with the example of the **execution of Sugandhadevi** not so long ago."
- "The first direct challenge she faced was from **Kshemagupta**’s sister’s sons, Mahiman and Patala. They gathered many allies, especially Brahmins from Lalitadityapur, and surrounded her when she was visiting the Padmasvamin temple. She managed to get her son away to a math, and then asked to negotiate..she managed to bribe some of the supporters and placate others..Her faithful minister **Naravahana** then won a victory over the rest. She ruthlessly killed off many of the rebels including her husband’s nephews, but forgave some she thought would be of use to her.

  One of them was the warrior **Yashodhara** whom she sent to subdue Thakkana, the ruler of a neighbouring kingdom of Shahi descent...Yashodhara came back expecting a hero’s welcome, but instead there was a botched-up attempt by Didda to arrest him.
  
  Yashodhara immediately revolted...This was perhaps the toughest revolt Didda faced...the rebels and their relatives were brutally killed.

  **Naravahana** now became the most important man in the kingdom. Didda, a little nervous of his power, became a little aloof and started favouring others. Brokenhearted, **Naravahana committed suicide**. In some time, **Rakka also died**. *Didda, left alone, could see the **Damaras** uniting against her, and recalled **Phalguna** who was living in retirement in Poonch, who then effectively subdued the **Damaras**.*"
- "..Any victorious army marching back to the capital always makes the ruler insecure, especially when the commander had previously rebelled. Looking at a parallel in history, Julius Caesar, after his tremendous victories in Gaul, was asked to return without his army. He came back with his legions and captured Rome, and took over the empire."
- " Kalhana says: *“The Lame Queen whom no one had thought capable of stepping over a cow’s footprint got over the host of her enemies just as Hanuman got over the ocean.”*"
- "In 972, Abhimanyu, her only child, died.  His minor son Nandigupta was crowned, and Didda continued as regent."
- "Nandigupta fell sick and died in a year, followed in quick succession by the next grandson Tribhuvangupta, who had been crowned by her in 973. *Many accused Didda of witchcraft in bringing about their deaths*, but this is likely to be bad press, as she clearly had nothing to gain by doing so. She crowned the third grandson Bhimagupta in 975."
- "**Phalguna**, her Chief Minister and the mainstay of her administration, died during Bhimagupta’s reign. There was a new twist in her life at this point with the entry of a young man, Tunga. **Tunga** was a Khasa buffalo herdsman from Poonch, who had come to Kashmir with his brothers, and was employed as a letter carrier in her government. Impressed by his capabilities, she started promoting him, until he finally became Prime Minister and commander of the armies. He actually continued to capably hold these posts for nearly 40 years, even after her death. He was widely considered to be her lover, though she was more than 50 years old by the time she met him."
- "Bhimagupta, meanwhile, was close to attaining adulthood and was getting interested in administrative affairs and reform. He died in mysterious circumstances in 981; many say he was imprisoned and tortured to death by Didda."
- "Didda ascended the throne in her own name and ruled for the next 22 years in absolute power until she died in 1003 at the age of 79, quashing rebellions periodically..."
- "*There is a story in Roman history where the Tarquin king, when asked by his son for advice on how to rule, goes to the garden and scythes off the heads of the tallest poppies.  She used this theory until there was no opposition left.*"
- "Says Kalhana: “Those treacherous ministers who for 60 years…had robbed 16 kings, from King Gopala to Abhimanyu, of their dignity, lives and riches, were quickly exterminated by the energy of Queen Didda.”
- "**Tunga** was by her side as she put down a revolt fomented by her nephew Vigraharaja.  **Tunga** also spearheaded a major victory over Prithvipal, the king of Rajapuri (Rajouri)."
- "*There is a quaint story about how she chose an heir. She called for many boys from her maternal family and placed a heap of fruit in front of them, challenging them to pick up the maximum number. The boys started grabbing the fruit and fighting with one another. At the end of it, her brother’s son [[Samgramaraja]] had the maximum number, without actually engaging in any physical fighting. He had managed to incite the other boys to fight, while he calmly gathered up the booty. Impressed by his political acumen, Didda declared him her heir.*"
- "Thus, on her death, a new dynasty took power in Kashmir, the [[Lohara dynasty]]. [[Mahmud of Ghazni]] unsuccessfully attacked Kashmir twice, in 1015 and 1023, and [[Samgramaraja]] was almost the only king in India to beat him back, partly because of the strong army and administration created by [[Didda]]."
- "The [[Lohara dynasty]] finally came to an end in 1320, with the savage attack of the Mongol Dulacha on Kashmir, who absolutely devastated it over eight months. However, while leaving with his loot, his army was destroyed to a man at Banihal Pass by a fierce blizzard. As a wit put it, *Kashmir’s winter would not be as easily defeated as its kings*."
- "A new dynasty was then founded by a Buddhist from the Ladakh region, Rinchana, who later converted to Islam and took the name Sultan Sadruddin."