# India, Bharat and Pakistan

Created: 26/12/2022 13:24
#book #colonialism #middle-eastern-colonialism #islamic-colonialism 

Source: [[J Sai Deepak]] : [[India, Bharat and Pakistan]]

## My Thoughts
- 

## Fleeting Notes
1. "In popular discourse, the Partition of Bengal in 1905 on religious lines by the British is credited with sowing the seeds of the idea of Pakistan. This has created the false impression of communal harmony having existed between Hindus and Muslims prior to the employment of the so-called divide and rule policy by the British in 1905. While British motivations behind the Partition of Bengal and their subsequent hand in nurturing the idea of Pakistan must and will be examined in some detail, an exclusive focus on British machinations creates the erroneous notion of Hindus and Muslims being equal victims of British rule, drawing attention away from express attempts to restore Islamic rule over Bharat. It bears noting that an Anglocentric approach, which gives Middle Eastern coloniality a free pass in the context of Bharat’s Partition, is largely a product of the postcolonial school; this, therefore, reinforces the need for a decolonial approach to Bharat’s history to prevent the sugar-coating of facts with generous dollops of postcolonial secularisation.", page 25
2. "In the words of Saiyid Athar Abbas Rizvi, the following was Dehlawi’s conception of Islam:<br><br>The reason which prompted Allah to create the Islamic community originally was, according to Shah, mainly a political one. Allah wished that no religion superior to Islam should exist on earth and that Islamic law including those regarding different forms of punishment, should be adhered to wherever people lived a communal life. In this regard, he stated that the chief reason for fixing the blood-money for killing an infidel at half that of killing a Muslim was necessary in order to firmly establish the superiority of the latter; moreover, the slaughter of infidels, diminished evil amongst Muslims.", page 32
3. "As someone who considered Mahmud of Ghazni as Islam’s greatest ruler for having launched and sustained the first real conquest of northern Bharat, Dehlawi could not bear to watch the Mughal ‘empire’ under the licentious and un-Islamic Ahmad Shah Bahadur (1725–1775) survive only at the mercy of the Marathas. Here is a sample of his Islamic proposals to the Mughal dynast Ahmad Shah Bahadur, which went unheeded, much to Dehlawi’s angst:<br><br>Strict orders must be issued in all Islamic towns forbidding religious ceremonies publicly practised by the Infidels (such as Holi and ritual bathing in the Ganges). On the tenth of Muharram Shiís should not be allowed to go beyond the bounds of moderation and in the bazaars and streets neither should they be rude nor repeat stupid things (that is, recite tabarra or condemn the first three successors of Muhammad).<br><br>Notice how Shias, for whom Dehlawi had no love lost, could celebrate their festivals in public but in moderation, whereas Hindus had no right whatsoever to celebrate their festivals in public.", page 36
4. "According to Ayesha Jalal, Shariatullah, like Dehlawi, was an admirer of Arab culture, so much so that he ordered his followers to eat grasshoppers since they resembled the locusts eaten by his Arab co-religionists.", page 40
5. "Fortunately for him, his vehement call for practice of Islam in its purest form and for complete abandonment of Indian accretions which had arisen as a product of Muslims’ interactions with the infidels (namely the Hindus) found significant traction among Rohilla Muslims, who flocked to him in vast numbers. This was not surprising, considering that Najib-ud-Daula too was a Rohilla Pathan and the Third Battle of Panipat had taken place barely sixty years earlier. In case there existed an ‘Indian version’ of Islam and if there indeed was a Ganga–Jamuni tehzeeb, it was looked down upon and rejected by influential members of the Muslim community since the syncretism was largely the product of the Hindu ancestry of the converts. This means that what passes off as syncretism was and remains significantly the product of a nouveau convert unable to let go of his Hindu roots, which cannot be construed as Islam having acquired a distinct Bharatiya flavour or as revealing its malleability upon contact with Bharat. In any case, this ‘syncretic culture’ was given up by the masses, or at least by a significant number of them, at the first call to return to Islam 1.0, the din, the ‘true religion’. So much for ‘Indian Islam’.", page 45
6. "Thus began a series of bloody battles, starting with the Battle of Akora between the Wahhabis under Syed Shahid Ahmad Barelvi and the Sikhs under Maharaja Ranjit Singh, which would go on until the annexation of Punjab by the British in 1847—i.e., even after Ranjit Singh’s death in 1839 and after Barelvi’s death in 1831 at the Battle of Balakot", page 49
7. "This passage also underscores the historical significance of the surgical airstrikes undertaken by the Indian Air Force in Balakot in 2019 in response to the Pulwama suicide bombing. That the seeds for this terror network were sown by Barelvi in the 1800s needs to be pointed out, given the present-day tendency to look at certain incidents in isolation instead of identifying the existence of a thought continuum. Interestingly, the followers of Barelvi have not forgotten their history, whereas those who were the object of hatred of Barelvi and his mujahidin seem to suffer from a short memory. Ultimately, history tends to reward those with a long collective memory.", page 51
8. "According to Ayesha Jalal, Raza Khan is reported to have said that if a Muslim were presented the choice of offering water to a thirsty infidel or to a dog, he should offer it to the latter. He rejected the use of armed jihad against the British since the religious freedoms of Muslims remained unaffected under them.", page 82
9. "To support his British loyalist position further, Nawab Abdul Latif cited British support to the Ottoman empire in the Crimean War against the Russian empire, the cordial relations between the British and Ottoman Egypt, and the dependence of the Emir of Afghanistan on the British. He even obtained a fatwa from the Mufti of Mecca that Bharat was Dar al-Islam under the British and had 5,000 copies of the fatwa distributed among Muslims in Bengal through the Mohammedan Literary Society. In 1877, for his promotion of English education among Muslims, he was bestowed the title of ‘Khan Bahadur’ by the British.", page 94
10. "With a view to tip the balance and increase the Islamic quotient in the education of Muslim youth, institutions such as the Darul Uloom Nadwatul Ulama and the Jamia Millia Islamia were later established in 1898 and 1920, respectively.", page 94
11. "Khan’s father, Syed Ahmed Takki, who was a close friend of the then Mughal ‘Emperor’ Akbar II, was offered prime ministership, which he declined. After Takki’s death in 1836, the then (and last) Mughal ‘Emperor’ Bahadur Shah Zafar bestowed upon Syed Ahmed Khan the titles of his grandfather and additional titles. No wonder Barbara Metcalf makes it abundantly clear that Syed Ahmed Khan was ‘acutely sensitive’ to the loss of Mughal power and was keen on restoring the pride of the Muslim ruling class and nobility, a vision consistent with Dehlawi’s.", page 98
12. "Prior to the Mutiny of 1857, this so-called modern Islamic reformer subscribed to traditional Islamic positions even in matters of science, as evidenced by his monograph of 1850 titled Qaul-i-matin dar ibtal-i harakat-i zamin (‘Firm Assertion with Regard to the False Motion of the Earth’), wherein he denied the earth’s rotation.17 Given his family’s proximity to the Mughal dynasty, his training in the Dehlawite school of thought and his unambiguous Quranic views on matters of science, it is not possible to believe that the Two-Nation Theory was an aberration from Khan’s central worldview. On the contrary, it was entirely consistent with it, as we shall see, and any statement made by Khan to the contrary at any point in his life must, in fact, be seen as his pragmatism at work, which made no difference to the Dehlawite end goal. This pragmatism is evident from the fact that when the Wahhabis started directing their jihad towards the British after the latter’s annexation of Punjab, Khan could no longer afford to be as open in his adulation of the Wahhabis. Therefore, he redacted the above extracted paragraph from the very same book in 1854.", page 99
13. "The following were Khan’s views on the subject; here he simultaneously made the point that jihad against the British was unjustified whereas the Wahhabi jihad against the Sikhs was justified", page 102
14. "The English Government does not interfere with the Mohammedans in the practice of their religion. For this sole reason it is impossible that the idea of religious crusade should have been entertained.", page 102
15. "He went so far as to say that Mohammedans would never harm Christians since both had shared religious beliefs and were People of the Book.", page 108
16. "At that momentous crisis it was imperatively their duty—a duty enjoined by the precepts of our religion—to identify themselves heartily with the Christians and to espouse their cause, seeing that they have, like ourselves, been favoured with a revelation from heaven, and believe in the prophets, and hold sacred the word of God in His holy book, which is also an object of faith with us", page 109
17. "We in Hindoostan look upon the English as possessing evil disposition ... saying that they look upon Hindoostanees as animals, or beasts, and consider them low to a degree ... They do not understand us; and, moreover, I say in truth that we are so. I say without exaggeration and in all sincerity, that all Hindoostanees from the highest to the lowest, the richest and the poorest, the merchants and the labourers, the best educated and the most ignorant—we are, in comparison with the breeding and affability of the English, as dirty, unclean wild beasts in the presence of beautiful and worthy men ... I know my countrymen will take this as hard thing from me.", page 114
18. "Now, suppose that all English, and the whole English army, were to leave India, taking with them all their cannon and their splendid weapons and everything, then who would be rulers of India? Is it possible that under these circumstances two nations—the Mahomedans and the Hindus—could sit on the same throne and remain equal in power? Most certainly not. It is necessary that one of them should conquer the other and thrust it down. To hope that both could remain equal is to desire the impossible and the inconceivable. At the same time you must remember that although the number of Mahomedans is less than that of the Hindus, and although they contain far fewer people who have received a high English education, yet they must not be thought insignificant or weak. Probably they would be by themselves enough to maintain their own position. But suppose they were not. Then our Mussalman brothers, the Pathans, would come out as a swarm of locusts from their mountain valleys, and make rivers of blood to flow from their frontier in the north to the extreme end of Bengal. This thing—who, after the departure of the English, would be conquerors—would rest on the will of God. But until one nation had conquered the other and made it obedient, peace could not reign in the land. This conclusion is based on proofs so absolute that no one can deny it.", page 142
19. "...because the state of India is such that if foreign Powers attack her, no one has the power to oppose them. From this reasoning it follows of necessity that an empire not of any Indian race, but of foreigners, will be established in India. Now, will you please decide which of the nations of Europe you would like to rule over India? I ask if you would like Germany; whose subjects weep for heavy taxation and the stringency of their military service? Would you like the rule of France? Stop! I fancy you would perhaps like the rule of the Russians, who are very great friends of India and of Mahomedans, and under whom the Hindus will live in great comfort, and who will protect with the tenderest care the wealth and property which they have acquired under English rule? (Laughter.) Everybody knows something or other about these powerful kingdoms of Europe. Everyone will admit that their governments are far worse—nay, beyond comparison worse—than the British Government. It is, therefore, necessary that for the peace of India and for the progress of everything in India, the English Government should remain for many years—in fact forever!", page 143
20. "Our Hindu brothers of these provinces are leaving us and are joining the Bengalis. Then we ought to unite with that nation with whom we can unite. No Mahomedan can say that the English are not ‘People of the Book.’ No Mahomedan can deny this: that God has said that no people of other religions can be friends of Mahomedans except the Christians. He who had read the Koran and believes it, he can know that our nation cannot expect friendship and affection from any other people. At this time our nation is in a bad state as regards education and wealth, but God has given us the light of religion, and the Koran is present for our guidance, which has ordained them and us to be friends.", page 146
21. "It is pertinent to note that even as of March 1888, i.e., seventeen years before the Partition of Bengal in 1905 by Lord Curzon on religious lines, Syed Ahmed Khan was conscious of the growing Muslim demographic in Bengal and its implications for political assertion by Muslims, which, as we shall see, was a clear sign of things to come.", page 148
22. "I object to every Congress in any shape or form whatever which regards India as one nation.", page 149
23. "The Congress tried its best to court Muslims to participate in the national movement for political autonomy by even offering a compromise on the delicate issue of ban on cow slaughter in its Madras session of 1887. At this session, under the presidentship of Badruddin Tyabji, the Congress decided that questions of social reform that relate to a particular community, especially Muslims, would be decided by leaders of that community alone. While one may be tempted to see this as a sign of statesmanship on the part of the Congress and intransigence on the part of those representing the Muslim community, the fact of the matter is that the Congress had already embarked on the path of compromise by putting civilisational non-negotiables on the line, which served to further embolden the proponents of the Two-Nation Theory.", page 150
24. "From the brief history of Syed Ahmed Khan discussed above, it is clear that his formulation of the Two-Nation Theory was indeed the Dehlawite vision at work all along, couched in the European template of a nation-state.", page 151
25. "In the midst of this religious, political, demographic and administrative landscape in Bengal and the rest of Bharat, George Nathaniel Curzon, better known as Lord Curzon, arrived in Bharat in 1898,31 a year after Afghani’s death and the year Syed Ahmed Khan passed away. In January 1899, Curzon was made the Viceroy. As Viceroy, among his ‘accomplishments’ was the proposal to build the Victoria Memorial Hall in Calcutta (which began in 1906 and was completed in 1921) to demonstrate his reverence and affection for Queen Victoria, who passed away on 23 January 1901.32 His other achievement was the holding of the Delhi Durbar in 1903 to celebrate the succession of Edward VII as the ‘Emperor of India’, represented at this event by the Duke of Connaught, Prince Arthur.", page 186
26. "On the armed front, this period saw the rise of at least fourteen revolutionary and underground societies, such as the lesser-known Atmonnati Samiti, which was established in 1897, and the well-known Anushilan Samiti, established around 1902. The former ultimately merged with the latter in 1902.1 The Samitis, whose presence extended into the old and new provinces of Bengal,2 produced Revolutionaries like Aurobindo Ghosh, his brother Barindra Ghosh, Bhupendranath Datta, Khudiram Bose, Prafulla Chaki and Jatindra Nath Mukherjee (also known as Bagha Jatin). Interestingly, Bhupendranath Datta was the brother of Narendranath Datta, whom the world knows better as the cyclonic Swami Vivekananda.", page 211
27. "The fundamental belief of the Moderates/Liberals was that Bharat’s destiny was tied to British fortunes and that the future progress of the country was possible only under the British, since in their view Bharatiyas lacked both the capacity as well as the unity to build their own independent future. The following is an extract from Gokhale’s views on the subject, in his own words:14 Only mad men outside lunatic asylums could think or talk of independence. Some have gone so far as to talk of independence as an object of practical pursuit. We owe to the best interests of the country to resist the propaganda with all our resources. It means the sure destruction, or at any rate, the definite postponement of all these opportunities for slow but peaceful progress which are at present within our reach. There is no alternative to British rule, not only for now but for a long time to come and any attempts made to disturb it, directly or indirectly, are bound to recoil on our own heads.", page 213
28. "Fortunately for this class of Indians, from the late 1840s they had the support of the ‘friends of India’ in Britain, as Mazumdar calls them. Such ‘friends’, who were critical of the manner in which the British governed India, included John Bright. Here’s a sample expression of Christian colonial sympathy for India by this friend of India, John Bright, in 1853:23 There never was a more docile people, never a more tractable nation. The opportunity is present, and the power is not wanting. Let us abandon the policy of aggression and confine ourselves to a territory ten times the size of France, with a population four times as numerous as that of the United Kingdom. Surely, that is enough to satisfy the most gluttonous appetite for glory and supremacy. Educate the people of India, govern them wisely, and gradually the distinctions of caste will disappear, and they will look upon us rather as benefactors than as conquerors. And if we desire to see Christianity, in some form professed in that country, we shall sooner attain our object by setting the example of high-toned Christian morality, than by any other means we can employ.", page 222
29. "The Ilbert Bill, officially known as the ‘Bill to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1882, so far as it relates to the exercise of jurisdiction over European British subjects’, as the name suggests, was meant to empower magistrates and sessions judges of Indian origin to preside over criminal matters in which the accused were Europeans.", page 230
30. "Banerjea made his case for self-government and perpetual union with England in the following words:53 It is not severance that we are looking forward to, but unification, permanent embodiment as an integral part of that great Empire which has given the rest of the world the models of free institution.", page 233
31. "Wedderburn clearly states this in his biography of Hume: ‘The ill-starred measures of reaction, combined with Russian methods of Police repression, brought India under Lord Lytton within measurable distance of a revolutionary outbreak, and it was only in time that Mr. Hume and his Indian advisers were inspired to intervene.’", page 235
32. "The timing of the Conference around Christmas, the linguistic prerequisite expected of delegates (English) and the goal of proving to the British coloniser that Bharat was fit for representative institutions in the Western mould speak volumes of the nature of the Congress’s ‘moderate nationalism’. Today, when people wonder as to why ‘independent’ Bharat’s Constitution of 1950 was written in English and continues to be interpreted in English, perhaps they must look back at the linguistic prerequisite of the First Indian National Congress to find an answer.", page 244
33. "Pertinently, in his maiden speech as the first president of the Congress, W.C. Bannerjee made it a point to underscore his loyalty to the British government and acknowledged the ‘benefits’ accrued to India on account of British rule. Here is a relevant extract from the proceedings of the Conference:70 (Bannerjee said) Much had been done by Great Britain for the benefit of India, and the whole country was grateful to her for it. She had given them order, she had given them railways, and above all she had given them the inestimable blessing of Western education. But a great deal still remained to be done. The more progress the people made in education and material prosperity, the greater, would be the insight into political matters and the keener their desire for political advancement. He (Bannerjee) thought that their desire to be governed according to the ideas of Government prevalent in Europe was in no way incompatible with their thorough loyalty to the British Government. All that they desired was that the basis of the Government should be widened and the people should have their proper and legitimate share in it.", page 244
34. "To offset this criticism and to prove its ‘secular’ credentials, the Congress elected Badruddin Tyabji as its president for the Madras session. While Syed Ahmed Khan was crystal clear about his priorities, which was to reclaim state power for Muslims, or at the very least ally with the British to check the advance of what he saw as ‘the Hindu Congress’, the degree to which the Congress was willing to genuflect to and accommodate Muslims is evident from the following statement of Banerjea:80 We were straining every nerve to secure the co-operation of our Mohamedan fellow countrymen ... we sometimes paid the fares of Mohamedan delegates and offered them other facilities. I leave it to the readers to ask themselves if anything has changed between 1887 and the present.", page 250
35. "To add to this, in 1893, when the British Parliament passed a resolution agreeing to hold simultaneous examinations in England and India for the Civil Service, the Secretary of State for India and the Government of India intervened and overruled the resolution.90 This shook the Congress out of its belief that it could influence the British government in India by making its case before the British Parliament. The Madras session of the Congress of 1894 was held in the backdrop of this disappointment, and yet leaders such as Banerjea continued to express their deep conviction in the need to preserve loyal connections with the British in the following words:91 We have everything to lose, nothing to gain by the severance of our connection with England. We owe whatever position or prestige we have acquired to our English education and culture. If you were to leave the country our English education and culture would be at a discount. We are not particularly anxious to commit political suicide.", page 253
36. "Even when a British speaker at the 1894 session expressed the hope that the Congress would secure Home Rule for India, Banerjea corrected him to clarify that the goal of the Congress was not Home Rule ‘but a transformation of India into an organic part within a federated British Empire’.", page 253
37. "The gradual change in the Moderate position under pressure from the Nationalists, however, was evident at the 1902 session in Ahmedabad, where, for the first time, Banerjea suggested in his presidential speech that Indians must use indigenous goods as far as possible since the British government did not protect Indian industries through imposition of tariffs on foreign goods.113 This was a predecessor to the Swadeshi Movement of 1905, which Banerjea would launch in Calcutta after the formal announcement of the proposal to partition Bengal. But for the Nationalist pushback against the Congress’s undying loyalism to the British, such a suggestion probably would not have been made by Banerjea, one of the leading lights of the Moderate faction. Of course, in the very same speech Banerjea branded the Nationalists as ‘pessimists’ for their lack of faith in the Congress’s constitutional methods and the ‘fairness’ of the British government.", page 259
38. "Fuller also favoured Muslims in appointments to government posts; he issued a circular dated 25 May 1906 laying down that a fixed proportion of government posts should be reserved for Muslims, and until that proportion was reached no qualified Muslim candidate should be rejected in favour of a Hindu candidate, even if the latter was better qualified.129 This pro-Muslim bias was made further evident when Fuller compared himself with Shaista Khan, a Mughal governor who was appointed to Bengal under Aurangzeb. Comparing the Hindu and Muslim populations of the province, he caustically remarked that he had two wives, one Muslim and the other Hindu, and that he was pushed into the arms of the former owing to the rudeness of the latter.", page 266
39. "In December 1906, around the same time as the Calcutta session of the Congress, the annual All-India Mohammedan Educational Conference was organised at Dacca on 30 December 1906. It was presided over by Viqar-ul-Mulk, and Nawab Salimullah moved the motion for formation of the All-India Muslim League, which was accepted.", page 303
40. "Ironically, despite its stated object of preventing the rise of any feeling of hostility towards other communities, within three months of the founding of the League, riots broke out in Comilla and Jamalpur. R.C. Majumdar attributed these riots to, among other reasons, the infamous Lal Ishtehaar or Red Pamphlet, which was circulated in Dacca when the League was founded. The author of the pamphlet was revealed to be one Ibrahim Khan.", page 304
41. "The Comilla Riots were also discussed in the House of Commons. Here’s the extract from the proceedings of 19 March 1907 which sheds light on the role played by Nawab Salimullah and the evasive reply given by Morley", page 307
42. "Both Pal and Aurobindo Ghosh called for ‘passive resistance’; while Pal defined it as ‘non-aggressive active resistance’, the latter saw it as ‘lawful abstention from any kind of co-operation with the Government’.3 This effectively meant that the spirit of the Boycott and Swadeshi Movements would extend to the realms of education, administration, courts of law, police and even the army. The twofold objective of this resistance was to paralyse the colonial establishment and inculcate the spirit of self-reliance in Bharatiyas. To my mind, this was a clear articulation of the principle of non-cooperation at least fifteen years before Gandhi adopted it.", page 316
43. "Interestingly, according to Daniel Argov, even within the Nationalist group, views on the actual meaning of self-government were diverse.4 For instance, Tilak’s vision was closer to that of the Moderates, who sought self-government within the British Commonwealth, with the primary difference being the means employed to secure that vision. Rai, Pal and Ghosh, on the other hand, denounced both the methods of the Congress as well as its end goal. Rai was of the view that there could be no possible conciliation between patriotism for Bharat and loyalism to the British empire; Pal wanted an ‘autonomous government’ which was absolutely free from British control; and Ghosh defined Swaraj as ‘a free national Government unhampered even in the least degree by foreign control’.", page 316
44. "The period of 1906–1907 was restive in Punjab owing to certain land- and water-related legislative measures proposed by the British—the most prominent of them being the Punjab Land Colonisation Bill and the Doab Bari Act. In fact, the unrest in this province began in 1900 with the passing of the Punjab Land Alienation Act of 1900, which limited the transfer of landownership by creating a divide between ‘agriculturists’ and ‘non-agriculturists’. The Colonisation Bill provided that property would devolve on the British government if a person died without an heir, while under the Doab Bari Act water rates were increased. The reactions and opposition to these legislations resulted in movements such as the Pagri Sambhal Jatta Movement, which forced the British government to withdraw the Colonisation Bill.6 Lajpat Rai, along with Bhagat Singh’s father Kishan Singh and uncle Ajit Singh, was at the forefront of this agitation, and at one point it was feared that the Sikh units of the British Indian Army would revolt against the government at the behest of Rai. The impact of Rai and Ajit Singh is evident from the fact that Donald Ibbetson, at that time the Lieutenant Governor of Punjab, urged the Central government to recognise the seriousness of the situation and recommended their deportation.7 Minto acceded to this request for deportation of Rai and Singh and also vetoed the Colonisation Bill to calm frayed tempers in Punjab.", page 317
45. "To purge the Congress of the Extremists—in particular Tilak—and their influence, the venue of the 1907 session of the Congress was shifted from Nagpur to Surat, which was the home turf of Pherozeshah Mehta, a well-known Moderate.11 To add to it, Dr Rash Behari Ghosh, another Moderate, was elected as the president of the Surat session, whereas the Extremists wanted to elect Lala Lajpat Rai, who had been released on 15 November 1907.12 Also, a new constitution was proposed, which, among other things, expected every delegate to get on board with the Moderate vision and means—namely, self-government for Bharat within the British empire at par with other colonies, and constitutional agitation. Naturally, this was a message to the Extremists to either fall in line or leave the Congress.13 In response, a few days ahead of the Surat session, Aurobindo Ghosh organised a Nationalists Conference on 23 December 1907 in Haripur, on the outskirts of Surat. Both Tilak and Rai presided over the Conference and the delegates were expected to subscribe to the Nationalist vision and means—namely, complete independence and total boycott of the British.14 The drawing of battle lines between the two camps could not have been clearer. On the first day of the Surat session, i.e., on 26 December 1907, Pherozeshah Mehta brought over three dozen men armed with sticks to intimidate the Extremists, which was a new low even for the Moderates and the Congress.15 When Surendranath Banerjea rose to address the assembly and announce the election of Rash Behari Ghosh as the president-elect, he was heckled because the delegates wanted to listen to Rai and Tilak.16 On the second day of the session, Tilak vocally objected to Rash Behari Ghosh’s election as the president, which led to a general pandemonium, and the police had to be called in to tackle the situation.17 Thus ended the twenty-third session of the Congress in a limbo, whose split had now widened and was out in the open.", page 318
46. "Pertinently, Karachi was chosen because ‘Sindh is that pious place in India, where Muhammad Bin Qasim came first, with the torch of religion and the gift of Hadis.’28 To add to this, the president of this session, Adamjee Pirbhoy, remarked in his presidential speech:29 If a handful of men under a boy could teach Kalima to the territory of Sindh and promulgate the law of true shariat of God and His Rasul, can seven crores of Mussalmans not make their social and political life pleasant?", page 322
47. "To draw young talent and train them in revolutionary activities, Varma offered scholarships annually to three Bharatiya students to pursue their education abroad. Wasti points out that among the first recipients of this scholarship was Vinayak Damodar Savarkar, then the editor of Vihari in Bombay. It was during his stay at India House that Savarkar authored his seminal work, The Indian War of Independence, 1857, in response to the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the quelling of the 1857 Mutiny by the British.37 The activities of the Revolutionaries were not limited to publishing radical literature but also extended to smuggling of arms and ammunition into Bharat in an organised manner.", page 324
48. "The seriousness of the Revolutionaries can be gauged from their attempt to assassinate D.H. Kingsford, the Chief Presidency Magistrate in Calcutta, who was trying cases against nationalist publications like Yugantar, Bande Mataram and Sandhya.39 However, instead of Kingsford, the bomb attack, which was undertaken by Khudi Ram Bose and Prafulla Chaki, resulted in the mistaken deaths of two English women on 30 April 1908 in Muzaffarpur. It was during the course of the investigation into this case that the existence of a revolutionary safe house in Maniktola Gardens in Calcutta, where bombs were being manufactured, was revealed, leading to the Alipore bomb conspiracy case. As mentioned in the previous chapter, this resulted in the arrest of Aurobindo Ghosh, his brother Barindra Ghosh and others.40 As the first step in dealing with revolutionary activity, the Press Act was passed on 8 June 1908 to curb the spread of ‘seditious literature’.41 As was expected from the Moderates, both Gokhale and Rash Behari Ghosh termed the enactment inevitable and necessary.42 Subsequently, on 24 June 1908, Tilak was arrested and charged with sedition for his articles in his publication Kesari, wherein he praised the Bengal Revolutionaries for their activities.43 Tilak was represented by Barrister Muhammad Ali Jinnah in this case; however, he was found guilty by a jury and sentenced to six years’ imprisonment in Mandalay, Burma,44 from where he would be released in 1914. This experience, as we shall see, would result in a significant mellowing and even change of attitude on Tilak’s part upon his release, which would show in the form of support for Indian participation in the British war effort in the First World War, apart from his subscription to constitutional agitation.", page 324
49. "In fact, even as the Councils Bill was being debated in the British Parliament and in the Imperial Legislative Council in India in 1909, the year witnessed a spate of bomb explosions, assassination attempts and assassinations in Bengal, Maharashtra, London, Ahmedabad and Punjab.49 The year began with bomb explosions in both Bengals. Outside of the Bengals, in Gwalior and the Deccan, the existence of secret revolutionary societies was discovered in March 1909. They were being run under the stewardship of Ganesh Damodar Savarkar, brother of Vinayak Damodar Savarkar. In July, Madan Lal Dhingra shot dead the aide de camp at the India Office in London, William Curzon Wyllie. In November, there was an attempt on the Viceroy’s life in Ahmedabad. In December, the district magistrate trying Ganesh Savarkar was murdered. In January 1910, the deputy superintendent of police, Khan Bahadur Shams-ul-Alam, who was assisting the prosecution in the Alipore case, was murdered.", page 326
50. "Finally, on 17 December 1908, in the face of much opposition and with the support of Minto, Morley announced to the House of Lords his intention to appoint an Indian member in the event of a vacancy in the Viceroy’s Executive Council.58 However, this presented a dilemma, since the question was whether the member would be a Hindu or a Muslim. Unsurprisingly, Syed Ameer Ali, who headed the London branch of the Muslim League, lobbied for a Muslim member.59 Morley took the view that the issue would be decided based on merit and not religion. In the end, Advocate General S.P. Sinha was appointed, based on his track record, among other things—one of the other things being his complexion. He was chosen over Sir Ashutosh Mukherji because he was ‘comparatively white’ and was ‘more in touch with European society’, which made his appointment less vulnerable to Anglo-Indian and English resistance. Here’s the relevant extract from Wasti’s thesis, which attests to this:60 Minto personally liked Dr. A. Mukherji and was insisting on his appointment to his Council. But when Sinha’s name was proposed to him, it was impressed upon him that Sinha stood high in public estimation because of his professional skill and ability.Besides Sinha and his family were more in touch with European society. Being a barrister, his appointment to the Council would require no legislation, and the upward step from Advocate General would not seem unnatural. Minto wanted to take the line of least resistance in making this great change. ‘Moreover please do not think me terribly narrow! but Sinha is comparatively white, whilst Mukherji is as black as my hat! and opposition in the official world would not be regardless of mere shades of colour,’ Minto wrote to Morley. Hence Sinha was appointed on 23 March 1909.", page 329
51. "The Congress also expressed its gratitude to the government for announcing legislative reforms, including the proposal of electoral colleges with a fixed number of seats for Muslims.67 Banerjea declared the reforms as ‘the crowning triumph of constitutional agitation’ and hailed Morley as the ‘author of Parliament in India’ who had paved the way for colonial self-government.68 To understand the bubble in which the Moderates lived, here are the contrasting views of Gokhale and Minto on the significance of the reforms and the future of representative government in Bharat. Gokhale said:69 Hitherto we have been engaged in what might be called responsible association with the administration. From agitation to responsible association, and from responsible association—a long and weary step but the step will have to come—to responsible administration. And here is what Minto said:70 I am no advocate of Representative government for India in the Western sense of the term. It could never be akin to the instincts of the many races composing the population of the Indian Empire. It would be a Western importation unnatured to Eastern tastes. And this is what Morley, the ‘author of Parliament in India’, had to say:71 If it could be said that this chapter of reforms led directly or necessarily to the establishment of a parliamentary system in India, I for one would have nothing to do with it.", page 335
52. "Commenting on the cognitive dissonance of the Moderates and their refusal to see the ‘reforms’ for what they truly were and were not, S.R. Mehrotra had this to say:72 Strange though it might appear, Indian nationalists welcomed the reforms for the very reason which Morley and Minto had so emphatically and repeatedly disavowed. They interpreted them as an advance towards parliamentary self-government.", page 336
53. "At this juncture, it is important to address a question—if the British establishment was of the view that Western representative institutions were unsuited to Bharat, or rather Bharat was unfit for Western representative institutions, how can one blame them for the introduction of Western institutions in Bharat? There are two tentative responses to this question. First, the European belief that the races of the East were inherently incapable of Western-style democracy and therefore constantly needed the benign paternal supervision of the European, led to the policy of gradual conversion of the East at every level, including societal, until the colonised society was ready for mental integration with the West. This is best captured in Morley’s own words from October 1908:74 What are we in India for? Surely in order to implant—slowly, prudently, judiciously—those ideas of justice, law, humanity, which are the foundation of our own civilization. This takes us to the second possible response: ironically for Morley, the Moderates in the Congress were the products of this slow, prudent, judicious implantation of Western ideas of justice, law and humanity, which reflected in their craven pleas to be treated at par with the British subjects of the empire. In other words, the difference of opinion between the British government and the Moderates of the Congress was primarily that of timing and the extent of British control over Bharat, but not about the very existence of British control. While the British felt that India was not yet ready for self- government at par with other colonies, the Moderates in the Congress were eager to prove that they were indeed worthy of that imperial benediction. This demonstrates my position, which I stated in the first book, that colonial consciousness or coloniality is a two-way street. There is only so much that one can blame the coloniser for, beyond which the natives (in this case the Moderates) must take responsibility for eagerly embracing the colonisers’ worldview and for stifling voices of resistance and indigeneity (those branded Extremists/Nationalists at that point in time) from within their own society.", page 336
54. "If my criticism of the Congress of this period, in particular of the Moderates, seems too harsh compared with my appreciation for the League’s clear-cut approach to reclaim state power for Muslims, here is an illustration of the level to which the Congress had fallen in the pursuit of its warped dual policy of British loyalism and moderate nationalism that would justify my point of view. For the 1908 session, one of the delegates, S. Sankaranarayana, campaigned for replacement of the slogan ‘Bande Mataram’ with ‘Bande Matapitarau’, with Bharat being the Mata (Mother) and England being the Pita (Father).75 In fact, in the pamphlet, England was depicted as the guru or preceptor to Bharat, showering the light of its education and political thought on this land of heathens.", page 337
55. "This was one occasion when even staunch loyalist Moderates such as Surendranath Banerjea had to express their disapproval of the British.", page 339
56. "The Muslim League did not hold a session in 1909, but within three years of its founding it had achieved a major victory on its journey to re-establish Muslim state power in the Bharatiya subcontinent, namely the constitutional entrenchment of the Dehlawite vision and its Two-Nation Theory. This would haunt Bharat until 1947 and beyond, albeit under a different label, namely the so-called majority–minority divide.", page 343
57. "In the first place, an attempt should be made to instruct the pupils in reading, writing and arithmetic in their own language, not as it is done now in Urdu, which is a foreign language.", page 362