# India, that is Bharat

Created: 20/07/2022 15:18

#book #colonialism #roots-of-colonialism #colonial-roots-of-modernity-and-rationality

Source: [[J Sai Deepak]] : [[India, that is Bharat]]

## My Thoughts
- Some of the scholars mentioned in the book that need to be read are [[Har Bilas Sarda]], [[Radha Kumud Mookerji]], [[Jadunath Sarkar]] and [[R.C. Majumdar]].

## Fleeting Notes
1. "Most colonised societies did not realise that their entire worldview had changed, for they could not see beyond political independence and aspired for freedom to govern themselves, albeit using the same values and institutions they had ‘inherited’ from the European coloniser. In other words, owing to coloniality, the vision of independence of most native elites was limited to the politico-economic sphere, namely decolonisation, but did not include decolonialisation because they accepted the European worldview on the all-important cultural front as well.", page 60
2. "..[[colonisation]] is the process, [[colonialism]] is the policy and [[coloniality]] is the mindset or the thought that underpins or drives colonialism.", page 63
3. "The European coloniser consciously believed in the ‘biological and structural superiority’ of his race, which, in the mind of the coloniser, distinguished him from the colonised. This belief, which was the premise of the colonial power structure and a ﬁgment of the coloniser’s self-important worldview, was legitimised as being ‘objective’, or ‘scientiﬁc’, or ‘rational’ and therefore, ‘natural’.", page 65
4. "Modernity and rationality, as introduced and employed by the European coloniser, therefore, represented (and still represent) the weaponisation of time and appropriation of the very idea of ‘reason’ by the European coloniser and his successor, the Western imperialist, who negate and deny the histories and the lived experiences of entire civilisations from the moment of their arrival.", page 65
5. "The cumulative eﬀect was the deep embedding of coloniality in the consciousness of the colonised society, so much so that it started believing that it had been defeated because of its cultural moorings. To the colonised and now colonialised native, it seemed that the only way to regain dignity was by adopting European culture and thought processes, which included the European way of achieving economic prosperity, that is, by exploiting nature. This disruption of the critical relationship between indigenous societies and nature came to aﬀect the entire world.", page 67
6. "This complex did not die with decolonisation but remains alive and kicking even today, just as coloniality is. After all, as scholars have identiﬁed, coloniality goes hand in hand with modernity/rationality and vice versa. As long as coloniality is alive, despite its outward proclamations of open-mindedness, dialogue and diversity, the colonial DNA of modernity and rationality will continue to actively resist and oust indigeneity. It will staunchly refuse to accord indigeneity the respect of an equal and will continue to use time and ‘reason’ as weapons to question the very relevance of the indigenous point of view, because the underlying premise—indigeneity is racially inferior—has not changed.", page 68
7. "The intended goal of European colonialism and the outcome was global cultural hegemony, which includes a subject that has become a sensitive one to broach due to deeply ingrained unconscious coloniality—the religious origins and impact of European colonialism on indigenous onto-epistemological structures and processes, simply put, their spirituality and faith.", page 71
8. "..which meant that what was valid within the Christian worldview was deemed ‘good’ for the entire world, and those that did not conform had to convert or perish. Her views are certainly supported by the fact that **a Papal Bull called Inter Caetera was issued by [[Pope Alexander VI]] in 1493, which authorised Spain and Portugal to colonise, convert and enslave non-Christians.**", page 73
9. "..in the eyes of the Christian European coloniser, he was not merely ‘saving’ the soul of a non-Christian inﬁdel or idolator but was breathing soul into a Satan-worshipping subhuman, an animal, through his Christianising and civilising European touch. If this healing touch was resisted, the subhuman had to be put down ruthlessly like a beast.", page 81
10. "In stark contrast to the benevolent connotations imputed to humanism, the literature reveals, as we shall see, that it has the direct eﬀect of placing humans over and above nature, which is the product of coloniality.", page 88
11. "This enumeration of roles was based on the realisation of the ‘vast web of humankind’s cyclical interrelationships with the elements, the earth and all that lives upon the land’. Their relationship with the earth was one of ‘reciprocal appropriation’, that is, to give and receive, ‘in which humans participate(d) in the landscape while at the same time they incorporate(d) the landscape and its inhabitants into the most fundamental human experience and understanding’. To them, nature was never meant to be isolated from humans and studied in a silo. As opposed to being an object of clinical study, it was meant to be lived with in harmony. This ‘environmental morality’ instilled humility and informed both inter-community relations as well as their collective relationship with nature", page 89
12. "On a related note, perhaps followers of certain Indic schools of philosophy can relate to the beliefs of the [[Siouan culture]] as depicted by Brown in his book The Sacred Pipe. ***The Siouan people believed that the whole of creation was essentially one and that all parts within the whole were related.** What was particularly interesting was the way the Sioux referred to each other in relational terms. For instance, an old woman would be addressed as ‘mother’ and a much older woman as ‘grandmother’. Such an approach to human relations is a direct corollary of the community’s spiritual attitude to nature.*", page 89
13. "When the European coloniser set foot on the American soil, he was staunchly rooted in the Christian belief that humans were above other creatures since humans (read the White Christian) were ‘beings’ because they possessed souls, and the rest were ‘non-beings’ because they had no souls. Christianity placed the ‘human being’, preferably the Christian White European, above the rest of creation, thereby furthering the belief that nature existed solely for the ‘pursuit of his happiness’ and his ‘manifest destiny’. The diﬀerence in the attitudes of the Native Americans and the coloniser towards nature could not have been starker. One worshipped nature and saw himself as a part of it, while the other put himself above nature and sought to enjoy its plenty as a matter of divinely ordained right. It is no surprise then that ‘humanism’ and ‘materialism’ are the direct consequences of the coloniser’s OET, which, among other things, gave birth to a Cartesian dualistic approach, whose distinction between subject/mind and object/body placed human beings above nature. This explains the coloniser’s approach to ‘development’ as well. Simply put, coloniality objectiﬁed nature apart from dehumanising vast swathes of humanity.", page 90
14. "..despite the diversity of human experiences and natural conditions encountered by the coloniser in diﬀerent parts of the world, he was convinced beyond doubt that the same model of economic growth, industrialisation and development could be replicated uniformly across the world without exception. This once again reﬂects the homogenising intent and eﬀect of the modernity/rationality complex of European coloniality.", page 91
15. "This perhaps explains why the colonised territory was primarily viewed as a resource for exploitation, with its inhabitants being treated as subhuman, dark, idol-worshipping, soulless, heathen irritants who obstructed the coloniser’s unhindereduse of nature.", page 92
16. "The expectation that every religion must have a ‘book’ as its sole authority that captured its tenets was essentially a Christian expectation, which was imposed on the onto-epistemological systems of native communities in order to delegitimise or Christianise their faiths. The absence of a ‘book’ not only rendered their faiths but also their entire history legendary and mythical in the eyes of the coloniser.", page 94
17. "The Christian coloniser was acutely alive to the fact that language captured a culture’s journey and reﬂected it through its stories, idioms, proverbs and usages, which connected the speaker with the collective past. To remove traces of the past in the language of the future, native children were forbidden from speaking in their languages, a practice that continues in English-medium schools to this day.", page 95
18. "There even exist recorded instances of European legislators in colonial South Africa exhorting the South African government to ‘win the ﬁght against the non-White in the classroom instead of losing it in the battleﬁeld’.", page 96
19. "One ‘scientiﬁc’ reason that was oﬀered to explain the disparity in curricula was the coloniser’s perception of a given colonised community’s aptitude for knowledge based on race, the pecking order being Whites, Indians, Coloureds and Black Africans. The premise of this racial stratiﬁcation was that Africans could not master ‘bookish subjects’ and therefore, even if given an opportunity, were incapable of competing with Europeans. Accordingly, they were oﬀered only vocational or industrial training. On the rare occasion that ‘exceptional’ African students were oﬀered access to an ‘academic curriculum’, the medium of instruction was English, proﬁciency in which was integral to academic success.", page 98
20. "..there was an allocation of worlds between the monks and the clergy; the monks would lead the rest of the ‘ﬂock’ in the other world, the Church and its clergy would lead the ﬂock, including the rulers, in the earthly world akin to shepherds. In eﬀect, the priests became conduits to salvation and God since they were the true servants of God. This is the essence of the Christian doctrine extra ecclesiam nulla salus—all salvation is through Christ and Christ can be reached only through the Church, and therefore there is no salvation outside the Church.", page 112
21. "..the apparatus of the State was a Christian necessity to enforce Christian morality through the instrumentality of the law, with the Church and the State working together to fulfill their respective Biblically ordained Christian obligations.", page 117
22. "What needs to be appreciated is that the Peace of Westphalia did not result in the creation of ‘secular’ sovereign States as we understand them today, that is, States without an official religion. On the contrary, the war itself was fought for the right to have an official State religion, more specifically, to choose a State denomination within the Christian religion without having to dance to the writ of the Roman Catholic Church;", page 120
23. "..religious ‘minorities’ in this context were denominational minorities from within the same religion, namely Christianity, and their ability to practise their denominational faith in public was contingent upon the goodwill of the State and therefore, the majority denomination", page 121
24. "The Lockean premise of the need for civil authority is that humans are designed to prey on the fruits of others’ labour, and therefore need civil authority in the non-religious sphere, which is kept distinct from the religious sphere. De Roover demonstrates that this is but a secularised replication of the Christian assumption that humans are stained by sin and are fundamentally depraved, therefore needing a regnal authority to rein them in.", page 131
25. "There is enough literature to suggest that at least until 1795, when Kant completed the manuscript of Toward Perpetual Peace at the age of 71, he consciously and openly believed in the hierarchy of races, and in particular, the superiority of the Whites over the non-Whites. In 1788, he was of the view that people from Africa and India lacked the drive to activity, and hence lacked the mental capacities to be self-motivated and successful in northern climates. To him, the Native Americans were weak, inert, incapable of any culture and occupied the lowest rung of the racial hierarchy. For someone who is credited with the formulation of a universalist moral theory, until the age of 71, Kant’s belief that the Whites represented the perfection of humanity was writ large in his writings.", page 135
26. ".. he wrote that the black colour of a ‘negro carpenter’ proved the stupidity of whatever he said and that the difference in the mental faculties of the Whites and Blacks was as large as the difference in their colours.", page 135
27. "The irony of the situation was that on the one hand former colonies had to rely on their past to stake a claim for their nation-statehood, and on the other hand to be accepted into the ‘commonwealth of civilised States’, they had to embrace modernity and sever ties with their past.", page 142
28. "For instance, in South Africa, transformative constitutionalism represents the transition from an apartheid State to a democratic society, which has even facilitated decolonialisation, and hence Africanisation of legal education. In contrast, in countries like Bharat, transformative constitutionalism has led to the severing of ties between the civilisational ethos of Bharat and the evolution of constitutional jurisprudence. This is attributable to the fundamental differences in historical premise and end goals that inform such transformative constitutionalism.", page 143
29. "..a permanent fault line or division is created through an international instrument that manufactures an artificial power hierarchy between ‘national communities’ and indigenous populations or tribes while treating majority national communities as colonisers and less indigenous than the tribes. Putting such national communities in the same category as the European coloniser is as mischievous as it can get because it makes them the successors of the legacy of European colonialism and treats them as pre-European colonisers of indigenous lands. The origin of this categorisation can be traced to the creation of a ‘tribal’ identity by the European coloniser in colonised societies for the purpose of creating ethnic fissures that could simultaneously facilitate co-option of the influential cultural elites, and conversion of ‘indigenous tribal groups’ through evangelical activity.", page 163
30. "..it becomes important to understand the colonial and modern nature of ‘development’, which is one of the most powerful social, cultural and political forces in the world today that affects indigenous ways of life. This is especially relevant to former colonies which were categorised as ‘under-developed’ or ‘developing’ following decolonisation. The work of Colombian-American anthropologist Arturo Escobar in this regard is particularly arresting because he highlights the fact that this convenient categorisation by the West succeeded in creating the impression that former colonies were always ‘backward’ while the ‘West’ has always been a beacon of reason, progress and scientific temper. The irony of former colonies becoming ‘recipient countries’ and the colonisers—the ‘developed’ ‘modern’ Western imperialists—becoming ‘donor countries’ is not lost on him. From positions on respect for nature to the rights of indigenous peoples to practising their ways of life, everything is affected by modern conceptions of ‘development’ in former colonies that aspire to Westernisation instead of identifying their own goals based on indigenous frameworks. Therefore, ‘development’ warrants a brief unpacking to understand its impact on indigeneity.", page 168
31. "First, in order to answer these questions, it may help to understand that 500 years is nothing from the standpoint of human history and therefore, there is no reason to assume that the history of the last five centuries shall remain the history even for the next hundred years. After all, the West is not what it was even half a century ago.", page 174
32. "..ever since the offshoots of coloniality, namely globalisation and unconscientious mercantilism, have begun to expose the utterly destructive impact of coloniality on nature placing the world in a crisis, the cautious hope is that the world will begin its quest for alternatives that respect nature as being central to civilisation as opposed to relegating it to the category of a mere resource. This endeavour could possibly bring the world to the doorstep of indigenous knowledge systems, which could, in turn, lead to the resurgence of a relational association with nature, which is perhaps the intended outcome of decoloniality.", page 175
33. "..Inter Caetera of 1493 issued by [[Pope Alexander VI]] authorising Spain and Portugal to colonise, convert and enslave indigenous peoples is proof enough of the European’s colonising and evangelising objectives regardless of his ‘nationality’.", page 181
34. "What is also ironic is that, despite the experience of other indigenous societies whose precolonial religious identities have been either annihilated or reduced to a minority by the coloniser, in Bharat, the failure of the very same coloniser to significantly convert the indigenous population to his faith is interpreted as proof of his secular and purely mercantile intent. As opposed to crediting the inherent strength of the indigenous OET for resisting the coloniser’s evangelising overtures, the benefit of benevolence or tolerance is extended to the coloniser, who consciously operated under a distinct sense of anthropological superiority that stemmed from his religious beliefs. It is this blinkered approach that gives rise to ill-informed questions, such as ‘is not colonisation proof of Bharat’s inherent weakness?’ Such an ahistorical, secularised and self-defeating approach to the intent and conduct of the Christian coloniser is clear proof of entrenched coloniality in contemporary Bharat’s consciousness.", page 182
35. "The internalisation of European coloniality in Bharat is evident from the constant refrain of its elites that had it not been for the British—who had apparently stitched together a single country out of disparate entities with nothing in common—Bharat would not have been a single political unit or a ‘nation’; and that Bharat would have lacked infrastructure, such as trains, post, telegraph and the like, but for ‘investment’ by the coloniser in Bharat. In short, the very idea of Bharat, its civilisational unity, its relationship with time and its subjectivity have been tied to the advent of the coloniser, independent of whom it is assumed that Bharat had no consciousness of its own. This is glaring evidence of an abysmal understanding of the global history and nature of colonialism.", page 183
36. "1. The impact of the Christian European coloniser’s conceptions of ‘religion’ on Indic OET systems and the attendant alienation of nature;                                                        2. The application of the coloniser’s racial lens to Bharat’s societal structures, which gave rise to what we understand today as ‘caste’ and ‘tribe’;                                           3. The introduction of the coloniser’s education system at the expense of indigenous knowledge production and education systems;                                                                 4. The imposition of the Westphalian nation-state model on a diverse civilisational society; and                                                                                                                           5. The impact of the coloniser’s notion of ‘development’.", page 184
37. "I consciously use the words ‘sophisticated’ and ‘systematic’, since Middle Eastern colonialism’s predominant use of force inspired a similar response, which made it possible for Bharat’s indigeneity to offer fierce resistance and survive where other cultures and civilisations were wiped out for eternity. The expression of contempt and the intention to annihilate the other was worn on the sleeve by Middle Eastern coloniality, and therefore, the other (Bharat’s indigeneity) was acutely aware of the need to defend itself. On the contrary, European coloniality’s use of institutional mechanisms to co-opt the indigenous society and project Europeanism as the aspirational goal, lulled the indigenous consciousness into a false sense of comfort that coexistence was possible.", page 194
38. "This may not be surprising given Marx’s own Eurocentrism and avowed belief that British colonialism was good for Bharat. Marx believed that England had to fulfil ‘a double mission in India’, namely the annihilation of the old Asiatic society, and the laying of the material foundations of Western society in Asia. These were his views despite his own knowledge of the selfish nature of British colonisation of Bharat, best captured by his statement that ‘whatever may have been the crimes of England she was the unconscious tool of history in bringing about that revolution’, that is, in laying the foundations for ‘the material basis of the new world’.", page 195
39. "In this regard, I place limited reliance on Dr. B.R. Ambedkar’s views wherein he suggested a continuum of thought between the Islamic OET-inspired invasions of Bharat in the eighth century and the ultimate demand for the creation of Pakistan by the leading lights of the Pakistan movement, citing the Two Nation Theory. Following are a few relevant extracts from his book Pakistan or the Partition of India wherein Dr. Ambedkar charts the Islamic invasion of Bharat on a timeline beginning from the invasion of Sindh by Muhammad Bin Qasim in 711 ce (close to 80 years after the Islamic Prophet’s passing) to the Third Battle of Panipat between Ahmad Shah Abdali and the Maratha empire in 1761:", page 198
40. "The expedition against Sind by Mahommad bin Qasim was of a punitive character and was undertaken to punish Raja Dahir of Sind who had refused to make restitution for the seizure of an Arab ship at Debul, one of the sea port towns of Sind. But, there is no doubt that striking a blow at the idolatry and polytheism of Hindus and establishing Islam in India was also one of the aims of this expedition.", page 198
41. "On the other hand, what was done was in accordance with the ruling ideas of the leaders of Islam in the broadest aspects. These ideas were well expressed by the Kazi in reply to a question put by Sultan Ala-ud-Din wanting to know the legal position of the Hindus under Muslim law. The Kazi said:                                                                ‘They are called payers of tribute, and when the revenue officer demands silver from them they should without question, and with all humility and respect, tender gold. If the officer throws dirt in their mouths, they must without reluctance open their mouths wide to receive it. . . . The due subordination of the Dhimmi is exhibited in this humble payment, and by this throwing of dirt into their mouths. The glorification of Islam is a duty, and contempt for religion is vain. God holds them in contempt, for he says, “Keep them in subjection.” To keep the Hindus in abasement is especially a religious duty, because they are the most inveterate enemies of the Prophet, and because the Prophet has commanded us to slay them, plunder them, and make them captive, saying, “Convert them to Islam or kill them, and make them slaves, and spoil their wealth and properly.” No doctor but the great doctor (Hanifah), to whose school we belong, has assented to the imposition of jizya on Hindus; doctors of other schools allow no other alternative but “Death or Islam.”’", page 198
42. "Dr. Ambedkar, the chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Indian Constitution, was of the view that the Two Nation Theory was a reality that the indigenous society of Bharat must accept instead of squeamishly denying. Here are his views after his summary of the history of Muslim invasions of Bharat:  How far is it open to the Hindus to say that Northern India is part of Aryavarta?                                                            How far is it open to the Hindus to say because once it belonged to them, therefore, it must remain for ever an integral part of India? Those who oppose separation and hold to the ‘historic sentiment’ arising out of an ancient fact that Northern India including Afghanistan was once part of India and that the people of that area were either Buddhist or Hindus, must be asked whether the events of these 762 years of incessant Muslim invasions, the object with which they were launched and the methods adopted by these invaders to give effect to their object, are to be treated as though they were matters of no account?                                                                     Apart from other consequences which have flowed from them these invasions have, in my opinion, so profoundly altered the culture and character of the northern areas, which it is now proposed to be included in a Pakistan, that there is not only no unity between that area and the rest of India but that there is as a matter of fact a real antipathy between the two.", page 199
43. "The Muslim invaders, no doubt, came to India singing a hymn of hate against the Hindus. But, they did not merely sing their hymn of hate and go back burning a few temples on the way. That would have been a blessing. They were not content with so negative a result. They did a positive act, namely, to plant the seed of Islam. The growth of this plant is remarkable. It is not a summer sapling. It is as great and as strong as an oak. Its growth is the thickest in Northern India. The successive invasions have deposited their ‘silt’ more there than anywhere else, and have served as watering exercises of devoted gardeners. Its growth is so thick in Northern India that the remnants of Hindu and Buddhist culture are just shrubs. Even the Sikh axe could not fell this oak. Sikhs, no doubt, became the political masters of Northern India, but they did not gain back Northern India to that spiritual and cultural unity by which it was bound to the rest of India before Hsuan Tsang. The Sikhs coupled it back to India. Still, it remains like Alsace-Lorraine politically detachable and spiritually alien so far as the rest of India is concerned. It is only an unimaginative person who could fail to take notice of these facts or insist in the face of them that Pakistan means breaking up into two what is one whole.", page 201
44. "Judged in the light of these considerations, the unity between Pakistan and Hindustan is a myth. Indeed, there is more spiritual unity between Hindustan and Burma than there is between Pakistan and Hindustan. And if the Hindus did not object to the severance of Burma from India, it is difficult to understand how the Hindus can object to the severance of an area like Pakistan, which, to repeat, is politically detachable from, socially hostile and spiritually alien to, the rest of India.", page 203
45. "In his book Creating a New Medina, Dhulipala demonstrates, based on research surrounding the ideation and eventual creation of Pakistan, that it was conceived of as the ‘New Medina’. To support this position, Dhulipala cites the statements and efforts of proponents of Pakistan, such as Maulana Shabbir Ahmad Usmani, one of the founding members of Jamia Millia Islamia University and the founder of the pro-Pakistan political party Jamiat Ulema-e-Islam. Dhulipala cites Usmani’s speech delivered in Lahore in 1946 wherein the latter declared thus:                                       Just as Medina had provided a base for the eventual victory of Islam in Arabia, Pakistan would pave the way for the triumphal return of Islam as the ruling power over the entire subcontinent. The whole of Hindustan would thus be turned into Pakistan just as the Prophet himself had turned all of Arabia into Pakistan.", page 204
46. "I have attempted to showcase the views of a few early Indic scholars, namely [[Har Bilas Sarda]], [[Radha Kumud Mookerji]], [[Jadunath Sarkar]] and [[R.C. Majumdar]], who collectively lend support to the position that Bharat is indeed a civilisation and must be treated as such.", page 209
47. "Starting in 1912, another scholar who wrote extensively on various aspects of the Indic civilisation spanning over four decades was Radha Kumud Mookerji. In the context of establishing the civilisational character of Bharat, five of his works are particularly helpful: The Fundamental Unity of India (1914), Nationalism in Hindu Culture (1921), Hindu Civilisation (1936 and 1950), A New Approach to the Communal Problem (1943) and Akhand Bharat (1945), with the leitmotif of Mookerji’s work being captured in the first two.", page 213
48. "This conclusion must be read over and over to truly appreciate Mookerji’s deep and penetrative understanding of the nature of a civilisation and the role of the State in a civilisational society. Today, when the concept of a civilisation-state is being casually thrown around as a cosmetic talking point, Mookerji’s views are an educative read from an application perspective.", page 244
49. "To this culturally rooted perspective, it does not make a difference whether ‘even a blade of grass’ grows or not, or whether a particular part of this geography is ‘useless uninhabitable land’. That such words were used by the first prime minister of Bharat, Jawaharlal Nehru, in 1962 to describe a part of this sacred geography, and that too in the backdrop of Chinese aggression, is a reflection of how far removed Bharat was even in 1962 from its cultural spirit of veneration and deification of all parts of its geography to instead employ a cold, downright utilitarian and territorial approach. In my opinion, that every inch of this land is sacred and its sanctity is inviolable is a greater driving force in preserving its integrity than the mercantile territorial European approach that appears to have seeped into Bharat’s consciousness over time.", page 246
50. " The civilisational logic behind treatment of ecologically fragile or sensitive areas as sacred pilgrimage spots appears to have been completely lost on the ‘modern’ Indian State. This is because the State seems obsessed with ‘religious tourism’ and ‘ecotourism’, with diminishing respect for the fundamental matrix of nature, faith and patriotism that informs and makes this civilisation. Critically, this matrix includes respect for the rights of non-humans and their habitat. Bharat’s civilisation is not one that reduces nature to just another branch of study, namely ‘environmentalism’, to be ticked off as just another box in an environmental impact assessment checklist. Instead, it puts nature right at the heart of its worldview and sees divinity in every aspect, form and manifestation of nature. From such lofty heights that directly affected ecological balance, and therefore survival, for this civilisation to now put development and nature in two different baskets with the former being treated as the priority, is the clearest reflection of the pervasion of colonial consciousness. Pointing this out may invite labels, such as ‘tree hugger’, ‘luddite’ or being ‘anti-development’, but all of these are terms typically used in the West, thereby exposing the coloniality even in the reactions.", page 246
51. "..in a civilisation-state, the core unit is not the individual, instead it is the group, rather groups. The logic behind this position is that a European-style nation-state is built on the premise of a ‘nation’, that is, people bound by one or more factors, such as language, faith or ethnicity. Given the internal homogeneity of a European nation-state, it makes sense and is perhaps more desirable to treat the individual as the core unit whose rights must be safeguarded against intrusion by the State and other individuals. However, in a civilisation-state, every group is rightly interested in protecting its own identity from encroachment by other groups as well as by the State. Such being the case, to claim on the one hand that Bharat is a civilisation-state and to argue on the other that individual rights must remain supreme in a civilisation-state are logically, historically and constitutionally incongruent assertions whose impracticality, coloniality and naiveté are writ large on the face of it. Only a mind thoroughly dyed in Eurocentric/Western-normative ideas on individual rights while paying lip service to Bharat being a civilisation-state, is capable of missing the whole point of a civilisation-state by light years by treating the individual as the core of a civilisational society.", page 251
52. "Simply put, as long as a non-Indic worldview is capable of coexistence with Bharat’s indigenous worldview and does not seek to deny or sever the bonds that tie this land to its culture and its adherents, Bharat provides refuge and shelter to even such worldviews. After all, there are credible instances of groups whose OETs are diametrically opposite to that of Bharat’s, and have yet thrived in Bharat without persecution or loss of their individuality. This is attributable to the fact that they put aside some of their scriptural mandates in the larger interest of coexistence and with a spirit of gratitude towards Bharat’s welcoming nature. This is evident from Bharat’s provision of refuge to the Jews and Zoroastrians after they were driven out of their respective homelands by pre-Christian European imperialism and Middle Eastern colonialism respectively.", page 253
53. ".. Mookerji was not alone in his views; his position on the civilisational character of Bharat, its cultural unity and the causal factors for the same were echoed by yet another stalwart, [[Jadunath Sarkar]], in his book India through the Ages (1928)", page 254
54. "To illustrate the atmospherics of the period, one need not look beyond a 21-page paper titled ‘The Origins of Indian Nationalism According to Native Writers’ authored by Bruce T. McCully, an American professor of history, in 1935, which was published in The Journal of Modern History. The stated object of the study was ‘to determine the origins of Indian nationalism as indicated in the works of native writers’. However, McCully’s Eurocentrism reveals itself through his language that reeks of sheer condescension and contempt for the works of Mookerji and other ‘native’ voices, and is best captured in his own words:", page 256
55. "With their somewhat romantic attachment to the past glories of India in contrast to the despised present, these writers seem to invite criticism by their cavalier disregard for the evidences of history.... Far more weighty in number, diversity, and value are the writings which attribute the origins of Indian nationalism to the influences, on the whole beneficent, flowing into India as a consequence of British rule.                           …. The evidence indicates that an overwhelming majority of the writings examined prefer the latter thesis, thereby inclining to admit that Indian nationalism is not of indigenous origin but exotic, implanted not by native but by foreign hands, and germinating only under conditions and influences supplied by a foreign nation and people. It is equally apparent that a majority of the writers believe that the British supplied not only environmental and other factors necessary to evoke a national consciousness in India, but also the germ in the form of the nation-idea which they acknowledge to have been originally entirely foreign to the Indian mind.", page 257
56. "..it seems to suggest that in the course of time Indian writers and commentators will tend increasingly to emphasise the influence of the British-born institutions which have tended to bear upon every part of the social fabric, rather than those institutions having a strictly political character.                                                                              Sadly, McCully’s prognosis of the future was prophetic since, to me, it certainly seems that in contemporary Bharat there are more voices, even among ‘experts’, which endorse and echo McCully’s views on Bharat’s history than those that subscribe to the Indic school of thought.", page 258
57. ".. the very same views expressed by Sarda, Mookerji, Sarkar and Majumdar and others on the civilisational character of Bharat and its cultural unity are welcomed and received with a lot more enthusiasm when a book titled India: A Sacred Geography is written by Diana L. Eck. Perhaps, the colonial consciousness of the Indian mind is put at ease by the fact that a white Westerner, and that too a professor of comparative religion and Indian studies at Harvard University, has recognised the sacred nature of Bharat’s geography and appropriately caveated her position with standard-issue expressions of the fear of her work feeding the ‘fervor of an exclusive new Hindu nationalism’. Since all the right boxes have been ticked in the mind of the colonialised Indian, both the messenger and the message are kosher or halal.                                   In a nutshell, there are typically only two acceptable choices for those who wish to understand Bharat’s history—they must either subscribe to that school of thought which denies Bharat’s antiquity, unity and Indic consciousness, or accept the view which recognises the validity of Bharat’s indigenous OET, with the caveat that ‘Hindu nationalism’ must be exorcised from the Indian mind. And preferably, voices belonging to either school must not be Indian, and if they are Indian or of Indian origin, their credentials must be certified and validated by Western academia.", page 258
58. ".. the founding of the Company can be traced to the events triggered by the Inter Caetera, the Papal Bull of 1493 issued by [[Pope Alexander VI]], which is referred to in Chapter 2.                                                                                                                      Under the terms of the Bull, which bound Spain and Portugal, Bharat fell within the non-Christian territories earmarked for colonisation, enslavement and evangelisation by Portugal. Subsequently, in 1580, the rights of Portugal over Indian territories were assigned to Spain as the latter’s sovereignty extended to Portugal. However, since the Protestant Reformation had undermined the authority of the Catholic Church and the Pope, one of the consequences was the revolt of the Dutch against the Spanish, which resulted in the loss of Spain’s monopoly over trade in the East, particularly in Java, between 1595 and 1599. Fearing Dutch monopoly over eastern trade, the English East India Company was established. It is clear from this sequence of events that Bharat’s colonisation by Europe was not uninfluenced by the Protestant Reformation.", page 263
59. "While it is typically assumed that the Company, as a commercial entity, had no ‘civilising’ interest in aiding the spread of Christianity in Bharat, there is evidence to suggest the contrary. For instance, in 1614, the Company put in place measures ‘for the recruitment of Indians for the propagation of the Gospel among their countrymen and for imparting to these missionaries such education, at the Company’s expense, as would enable them to carry out effectively the purposes for which they were enlisted’. Further, in 1659, the directors of the Company were clear that it was ‘their earnest desire by all possible means to spread Christianity among the people of India’, which led to missionaries being allowed to travel to Bharat on the Company’s ships.", page 264
60. ".. by the 1680s, the Company was seen as an instrument for the creation of a British Empire in Bharat, which resulted in the Charter of 1683, giving the Company the complete powers to ‘declare and make peace and war with any of the heathen nations of Asia, Africa and America within the charter limits, to raise, arm, train, and muster such military forces as seemed requisite and necessary, and to execute martial law for the defence of their forts, places, and plantations against foreign invasion or domestic insurrection or rebellion’ (emphasis added).", page 264
61. "That the Company was the product of coloniality and the Christian consciousness of the British Crown was established in judicial proceedings in 1683, when it brought an action against another English trader, Thomas Sandys, for directly trading with India in violation of the exclusive rights granted to it by the Crown under the Charter. Among the reasons spelt out by the King’s Bench of the England and Wales Court for upholding the legal validity of the Company’s action against Sandys under the Charter, one was that the King, as a good Christian, ought to be and was deemed to be at war with ‘infidels’ forever, which applied equally to all his subjects. Therefore, as the defender of the Christian faith, it fell within the scope of his prerogative to relax this ‘normal rule’ for his subjects or a for a class of them if he so deemed fit, and only such beneficiaries of the relaxation would be allowed to trade with the ‘enemy’, that is, the infidel. It was not permissible for other subjects to trade with the enemy unless they were directly permitted by the King or were licensed to do so by the Company. Therefore, for all practical purposes, the Charter issued in favour of the Company had a distinct and express Christian colonial character, since it was bound by such rules of conduct regarding commerce with ‘infidels’ that were consistent with those of the Christian faith.", page 265
62. "For the purposes of the discussion here, the Charter of September 1698 is an important document, since it took forward the colonial evangelical intent of both the Company and the British Parliament in a limited yet concrete fashion by specifically inserting what came to be known as ‘the Missionary Clause’. This Clause required the Company to maintain Christian clergy at their Indian factories and to have chaplains on their ships which weighed 500 tons or more. The clergy so appointed to reside in Bharat were required to learn Portuguese within a year of being sent to Bharat, and critically, were also obligated to learn the native language of the country where they shall reside ‘to enable them to instruct the Gentoos that shall be the servants or slaves of the same Company or of their agents, in the Protestant religion’. In other words, at the very least, the Company was expected to spread the Gospel among its Indian employees, which, in my opinion, is proof of intent to ‘civilise’ the native and was a clear indication of what was to come in a more systematic fashion over the years.                                                                                                                     By 1726, a royal charter was issued, which permitted the Company to establish mayor’s courts in Madras, Bombay and Calcutta. Further, appeals could be preferred from the said courts to the governor and ultimately to the King, which marked the integration of the legal infrastructure between the colonies in India and the Crown. Between 1726 and 1773, thanks to victories of the Company in the Battles of Plassey (1757) and Buxar (1764), coupled with the brazen profiteering of the Company at the expense of the Indian population during the Bengal famine of 1770—when a fifth of Bengal’s population perished under the governorship of Warren Hastings—it dawned upon the British Parliament that the Company had long moved away from being a mere commercial entity. The Company was seen for what it truly was or had become—an extension of British sovereignty in the East through delegation of powers reinforced by the nature of monopoly enjoyed by it under the Charter.", page 267
63. "By 1813, in the East India Company Act of the same year, the Crown categorically spoke of its ‘undoubted sovereignty’ over the said territories and others. Critical to the discussion at hand on coloniality of the British coloniser are the provisions of the 1813 Act which related to ‘religion’, ‘morals’ and ‘education’. Reproduced herein below are the relevant excerpts of Section 33 of the 1813 Act:<br><br>XXXIII: And whereas it is the duty of this country to promote the interest and happiness of the native inhabitants of the British dominions in India; and such measures ought to be adopted as may tend to the introduction among them of useful knowledge, and of religious and moral improvement: and in furtherance of the above objects, sufficient facilities ought to be afforded by law to persons desirous of going to and remaining in India, for the purpose of accomplishing these benevolent designs, so as the authority of the local government respecting the intercourse of Europeans with the interior of the country to be preserved, and the principles of the British Government, on which the natives of India have hitherto relied for the free exercise of their religion, be inviolably maintained: and whereas it is expedient to make provision for granting permission to persons desirous of going to and remaining in India for the above purposes, and also to persons desirous of going to and remaining there for other lawful purposes;… (emphasis added).<br><br>This extract succinctly captures the British Christian policy of toleration as discussed in Chapter 4. On the one hand, it paid lip service to the right of the native inhabitants to practise ‘their religion’ freely, while on the other, it spoke of the ‘introduction’ of ‘useful knowledge’ to the natives and of their ‘religious and moral improvement’. Further, the provision spoke of extending all facilities needed to ‘persons going and remaining in India’ for the accomplishment of the ‘benevolent designs’ of the Christian White European coloniser.", page 269
64. "The ‘persons’ who would remain in India for the achievement of the said ‘benevolent’ designs were Christian missionaries, and this becomes evident not only from the literature but also from other provisions of the Act. Sections 49–54 of the Act provided an elaborate scheme for the creation of a church establishment in the British Territories in India with the appointment of one bishop and three archdeacons for Calcutta, Madras and Bombay. Further, under Section 43, a sum of not less than a lakh of rupees would be set apart annually ‘for the revival and improvement of literature, and the encouragement of the learned natives of India, and for the introduction and promotion of a knowledge of the sciences among the inhabitants of the British Territories in India’ (emphasis added), which underscores the colonial belief that the sciences have European origins. Based on the provisions of the 1813 Act, it could be reasonably inferred that the intent of the Company as expressed in 1614 and 1659 to spread Christianity among the people of Bharat, had formally crystallised into the establishment of a Christian ecosystem in Bharat under the mandate of the Crown and the British Parliament.", page 271
65. "The Company’s reluctance to institutionalise missionary activity was also partly owed to the experience of the Vellore Mutiny in 1806, which resulted in the death of 200 in a garrison of 370 due to a revolt of Indian soldiers against their officers. The revolt was triggered by apprehensions among the soldiers that the Company was intent on converting them to Christianity by force. Therefore, the Company had its own reasons for partially staving off missionary activity at the levels sought by pro-mission groups.", page 272
66. ".. one of the reasons marshalled as the pretext for it was the inadequacy of the number of ministers of religion and chaplains in Bharat, which supposedly had led to ‘grossly immoral behaviour’ on the part of the Europeans. The blame for their immorality was, of course, conveniently laid at the doors of the native heathen population, which was deemed to be fundamentally and inherently immoral. Therefore, while the excuse cited was the growing European immorality in Bharat, the goal was ultimately the conversion of Indians, who had to be saved from their ignorance, darkness and devil-worshipping ways. To support their case of inherent immorality of the ‘Hindoos’, Hindu beliefs and practices were demonised, as evidenced by the propagandisation of the annual Shri Jagannath Rath Yatra at Puri (Odisha), as a ‘dangerous cult’ and the brazen exaggeration of the prevalence of Sati. In this regard, the writings of Claudius Buchanan, a Scottish clergyman and a missionary, were extremely popular in both England and America. In fact, he must be credited with the corruption of the word ‘Jagannath’ to ‘juggernaut’ and for using the Rath Yatra to portray Hinduism as a ‘bloody, violent, superstitious and backward religious system’, which had to be rendered extinct and replaced with the gospel. He made the case for the ‘social reform’ of Bharat to his audience in England which resonated greatly owing to the popularity of Protestantism.", page 273
67. "..in those territories and provinces in India which now form a part of his Majesty’s dominions; and that, while the natives of those countries have long been and still continue in a state of deplorable ignorance, and addicted to various idolatrous and superstitious usages of the most degrading and horrible description, many of our own countrymen, members of the church of Scotland, employed in the different civil and military departments in India, are precluded from enjoying the ordinances of Christianity agreeably to the forms of the Church to which they are attached; and that, while the situation of India, destitute of the means of religious instruction, has long presented the most urgent claims to the humanity of Britons and of Christians, the restrictions to which the intercourse with those countries has hitherto been subjected, have prevented attempts for affording them the relief which the exigencies of their situation so imperiously required; and praying the House to take into consideration the facts which have been stated in this Petition, and to provide, in any Bill that may be passed for renewing the East India Company’s charter, that it shall be lawful for the petitioners to impart the benefits of Christianity to the natives of India, and to afford the advantages of religious worship and instruction to our countrymen members of the church of Scotland, who may reside in that part of the British empire, subject always to such salutary regulations as parliament in its wisdom shall judge it necessary to establish (emphases added).", page 275
68. " It needs to be understood and acknowledged that the stereotypes about Hinduism that Buchanan gave birth to in the 1800s, which informed Wilberforce’s Petition to make a case for missionary activity in Bharat, continue to relentlessly hound the followers of Sanatana Dharma, both in Bharat and in the West, though the West hypocritically preaches diversity and toleration to the rest of the world. Clearly, Christian OET has contributed substantially to the creation of the white man’s saviour complex that has done more harm than good to the world.<br><br>Wilberforce’s Petition is but an illustration of the dominant view of British society of the time, which ultimately led to the Company’s Charter being renewed with the imposition of evangelical obligations. I use the word ‘dominant’ with basis, since the proposal to impose such obligations won with an overwhelming majority of 89 to 36 in the British Parliament, with the other important consequence being that the British government gained greater control over the affairs of the Company as well as over Bharat. Effectively, the insertion of the Missionary Clauses in the 1813 Act was a milestone that led to feverish missionary activity in Bharat.", page 276
69. "For instance, the State patronage of Christianity and its clergy in Bharat was made abundantly clear when the Indian Bishops and Courts Act, 1823 was passed, which contained both ‘secular’ and ‘non-secular/religious’ aspects. Not only was this the legislation under which a Supreme Court of Judicature in Bombay was established, it also provided for payment of pensions to bishops and archdeacons who served in Bharat. A more incongruous mix of the religious and the secular cannot be found, but perhaps it did not appear incongruous to the British coloniser since his secularism was, after all, Christian secularism.", page 277
70. "The Bengal Sati Regulation of 1829 was a direct product of the movement for ‘social reform’. In fact, [[Dr. Meenakshi Jain]] in her scholarly work [[Sati]]: Evangelicals, Baptist Missionaries, and the Changing Colonial Discourse has brilliantly captured the direct nexus between the said law and the malicious representation of Hindu society using [[Sati]] as the soapbox to grandstand from in order to legitimise the civilising mission of the Christian White European coloniser. She demonstrates credibly in her book that the presence of [[Sati]] as a practice was nowhere close to being as rampant as it was made out to be by the missionaries to ‘shock and motivate the British public and also garner funds at home for missionary work in India’, apart from pushing for the inclusion of the Missionary Clause in the 1813 Act.", page 277
71. "Even in the celebration of their most sacred festivals, a great change is said to be perceptible in Calcutta. Much of what used, in old times, to be distributed among beggars and Brahmins, is now, in many instances, devoted to the ostentatious entertainment of Europeans; and generally the amount expended in useless alms is stated to have been greatly curtailed. The complete and cordial co-operation of the native gentry in promoting education and in furthering other objects of public utility; the astonishing progress which a large body of Hindoo youth has made in the acquisition of the English language, literature, and science; the degree in which they have conquered prejudices that might otherwise have been deemed the most inveterate (the students in the medical class of the Hindoo College under Dr. Tytler, as well as in the medical native school under Dr. Breton, in which there are pupils of the highest castes, are said to dissect animals, and freely to handle the bones of a human skeleton)...", page 281
72. "..securing the good government and promoting the moral and religious improvement of the people of India (emphasis added).", page 283
73. "..unfortunate cultivators of Hindoostan had been unable to obtain, for their portion of the produce of the soil, sufficient for the barest subsistence that would keep men alive; and with all their attachment to their altars and their homes, they had been obliged by exaction and oppression, to leave both, and migrate into the territories of a native Indian prince, the Rajah of Mysore—there to find, under the government of a heathen and an infidel, that mercy which had been denied them under the Christian government of the India Company, to which we were nevertheless now called upon to consign over a hundred millions of these helpless people for a period of twenty years more (emphases added)!", page 285
74. ".. the following was the criticism heaped by Buckingham in the House of Commons:<br><br>.... Among the various pretexts on which the East-India Company grounded their claims to admiration, for the excellence of their rule, none was more frequently or powerfully insisted on than this: that, though they had conquered the country, they had always respected the religious usages of the people—they were tolerant even of their abominations, and would not venture to disturb their most obscene or bloody rites. But what was the real state of the case? It was this:- Wherever no profit was to be made, by interfering with the native superstitions, there they permitted them to flourish, in all their rankness and deformity.", page 285
75. "It is scarcely possible to calculate the benefits which we might derive from the diffusion of European civilisation among the vast population of the East. It would be, on the most selfish view of the case, far better for us that the people of India were well governed and independent of us, than ill governed and subject to us; that they were ruled by their own kings, but wearing our broadcloth, and working with our cutlery, than that they were performing their salams to English collectors and English magistrates, but were too ignorant to value, or too poor to buy, English manufactures. To trade with civilised men is infinitely more profitable than to govern savages. That would, indeed, be a doting wisdom, which, in order that India might remain a dependency, would make it a useless and costly dependency, which would keep a hundred millions of men from being our customers in order that they might continue to be our slaves.", page 293
76. "What is power worth if it is founded on vice, on ignorance, and on misery; if we can hold it only by violating the most sacred duties which as governors we owe to the governed, and which, as a people blessed with far more than an ordinary measure of political liberty and of intellectual light, we owe to a race debased by three thousand years of despotism and priestcraft? We are free, we are civilised, to little purpose, if we grudge to any portion of the human race an equal measure of freedom and civilisation.", page 294
77. "It may be that the public mind of India may expand under our system till it has outgrown that system; that by good government we may educate our subjects into a capacity for better government; that, having become instructed in European knowledge, they may, in some future age, demand European institutions. Whether such a day will ever come I know not. But never will I attempt to avert or to retard it. Whenever it comes, it will be the proudest day in English history. To have found a great people sunk in the lowest depths of slavery and superstition, to have so ruled them as to have made them desirous and capable of all the privileges of citizens, would indeed be a title to glory all our own. The sceptre may pass away from us. Unforeseen accidents may derange our most profound schemes of policy. Victory may be inconstant to our arms. But there are triumphs which are followed by no reverse. There is an empire exempt from all natural causes of decay. Those triumphs are the pacific triumphs of reason over barbarism; that empire is the imperishable empire of our arts and our morals, our literature and our laws (emphasis added).", page 295
78. "He repeated then his assertion, that the religion of the New Testament was conceived ill a different spirit from this; and that the nearer we approached to the purity, economy, meekness, and piety of the Apostolic age, the greater would be the probability of our enlightening, moralising, and christianising, the whole Eastern world.", page 300
79. "... am quite sure, that this is your bounden duty in the interests of humanity, of benevolence, and of morality and religion—that as far and as fast as you can do it safely, wisely, and prudently, the inhabitants of India should be gradually intrusted with more and more of the superintendence of their own internal affairs, under the control of British authority, and taught to respect that authority which is vested in the law, and which they see judiciously and firmly enforced, temperately enforced also, by the superior British authority, which they may by long habit and practice learn to imitate, and, I would hope, even to surpass.", page 306
80. "I say that, even if the gigantic power of Britain over India should in the course of years, but centuries must first elapse, fall to the ground by the operation of our own hands, it will have been an achievement worthy of a nation like this to have rescued the native population from the state of ignorance, superstition, and debasement in which we found a large portion of them sunk, and to have placed them, at the expiration of the period of our dominion, in the capacity of administering the affairs of their own country as an independent nation, but under the influence of those laws, those principles, and those sound maxims which they ought ever to entertain gratitude to this country for having with care and pains instilled into their hearts.", page 306
81. "Since temples were predominantly seen as ‘Brahminical institutions’, the narrative employed against pre-Christian pagan temples in Europe was pressed into service with respect to Hindu temples and their practices. For instance, the charge of ‘sacred or cultic prostitution’ that was employed by early Christians to malign and slander pagan temples in Europe was extended to the Devadasi practice in Bharat as well, which ultimately resulted in the legislative abolition of the practice. Despite its abolition, the narrative of temple prostitution continued to be advanced in order to strengthen the perception that the ‘Hindoo religion’ was so fundamentally debauched, corrupt and obsessed with sex that its places of worship were also sites of prostitution. This coupled with the caricature of the evil Brahmin, effectively painted a picture that women were being forced to become temple prostitutes to pander to the dictates of the ‘Brahminical religion’.", page 318
82. "Simply put, toleration meant that what constituted the ‘Hindu religion’ was determined through the application of a manifestly Christian framework. This blatantly Christian attempt to understand ‘the Hindu religion’ also manifested itself in the coloniser’s understanding of the fundamental tenets or ‘laws’ of Hinduism, leading to the quest for a Moses-like ‘lawgiver’. This quest yielded Manu, the author of the much-reviled Manusmriti. Whether the Manusmriti, or for that matter the Dharmashastras, constituted a religious commandment/law, or a descriptive recordal of customs and practices was never clearly understood by the Christian coloniser since he was incapable of viewing the indigenous society through an indigenous perspective. Therefore, even conceptions of what constituted ‘religious law’ in the ‘Hindu religion’ were introduced through a Christian lens, which significantly affected both the coloniser’s understanding of the native society as well as the colonialised natives’ understanding of their own culture, since the Christian idea of seeking scriptural support for traditions was embraced by the latter. This led to attempts at converting the Hindu system of tradition to ‘religion’ in the Christian sense.", page 320
83. "Coming to the second issue of whether Hinduism is a ‘religion’ or a way of life, the debate invariably ends up stoking emotions for several reasons. The adherents of Indic faith systems are concerned, and rightly so, that the treatment of Hinduism as ‘a way of life’ and not a ‘religion’ by the Indian State might deprive them of their fundamental religious freedoms under the Constitution that are guaranteed to the followers of other religions. At the same time, they do not want ‘Sanatana Dharma’ or ‘Dharma’ to be equated with the Christian or Islamic idea of ‘religion’, again rightly so, since their OETs are very different. Nor do they want to be told that the ‘Hindu religion’ is essentially a Christian colonial construct because they understand that by calling it a colonial construct, some call into question the very precolonial existence of Dharmic belief systems and the notion of Dharmic oneness underlying the various Hindu sampradayas. There is more than an element of truth in these strands, each of which warrants unpacking.", page 328
84. "Said Tilak: ‘Acceptance of the Vedas with reverence; recognition of the fact that the means or ways to salvation are diverse and realisation of the truth that the number of gods to be worshipped is large, that indeed is the distinguishing feature of Hindu religion’", page 331
85. "Interestingly, the indigenous pedagogy and curriculum are discussed in great detail in a letter dated 17 August 1823 from A.D. Campbell, Collector of Bellary, to the President and Members of the Board of Revenue, Fort St George. Here are a few extracts which are telling in their demonstration of how far the contemporary Indian education system has travelled from its civilisational character, which existed even as recently as 1823, that is, less than two centuries ago:", page 363
86. "6. The education of the Hindoo youths generally commences when they are five years old; on reaching this age, the master and scholars of the school to which the boy is to be sent, are invited to the house of his parents; the whole are seated in a circle round an image of Gunasee and the child to be initiated is placed exactly opposite to it. The schoolmaster sitting by his side, after having burnt incense and presented offerings, causes the child to repeat a prayer to Gunasee, entreating wisdom. He then guides the child to write with its finger in rice the mystic names of the deity, and is dismissed with a present from the parents according to their ability. The child next morning commences the great work of his education.<br><br>12. The three books which are most common in all the schools, and which are used indiscriminately by the several castes, are the Ramayannm, Maha Bharata and Bhagavata; but the children of manufacturing class of people have, in addition to the above, books peculiar to their own religious tenets, such as the Nagalingayna, Kutha Vishvakurma, Poorana, Kamalesherra Ralikamahata; and those who wear the lingum, such as the Buwapoorana Raghavan-kimkanya, Keeruja Gullana, Unabhavamoorta, Chenna Busavaswara Poorana, Jurilagooloo, etc., which are all considered sacred, and are studied with a view of subserving their several religious creeds.<br><br>13. The lighter kind of stories, which are read for amusement, are generally the Punchatantra Bhatalapunchavunsatee, Punklee-soopooktahuller, Mahantarungenee. The books on the principles of the vernacular languages themselves, are the several dictionaries and grammars, such as the Nighantoo, Umara, Suddamumburee, Shuddeemanee, Durpana, Vyacurna, Andradeepeca, Andranamasangraha, etc., etc., but these last and similar books which are most essential, and without which no accurate or extensive knowledge of the vernacular languages can be attained,...", page 364
87. "...at least until 1823, indigenous consciousness and epistemology had survived 12 centuries of genocidal campaigns by Middle Eastern coloniality. In stark contrast, in less than two centuries, European coloniality has made deep inroads which Middle Eastern coloniality could not.", page 365
88. "...letter dated 11 December 1823 written by Raja Rammohun Roy to the then Governor-General of India, William Pitt. [[Raja Rammohun Roy]] was known as a ‘Hindoo social reformer’ and as one of the founders of the Brahmo Sabha. The following is a reproduction of Roy’s letter to Pitt, which reflected his views on indigenous education and his fervent appeal for European education:", page365
89. "I have never found one among them who could deny that a single shelf of a good European library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia.", page 377
90. "—a class of persons Indian in blood and colour, but English in tastes, in opinions, in morals and in intellect.", page 383
91. "...the conduct of the British in putting down the Rebellion had religious bigotry written all over it. While the Muslims among the rebels were sewed in pigskins smeared with pork fat before execution, after which their bodies were burnt, the Hindus were forced to defile themselves by consuming beef. As for the civilian population, the conduct of English troops should have denuded the British of the authority to hold forth on ‘civilisation’ for eternity. Thousands of civilians were massacred and villages that were suspected of helping the Indian Rebels were destroyed with the men being slaughtered and the women being subjected to all forms of sexual violence. Clearly, the unprovoked massacre at [[Jallianwala Bagh]] was not an aberration and not without precedent.", page 394
92. "—I mean the subject of religion, and the singular and responsible position which England holds as a Christian nation ruling over a nation of heathens.", page 401
93. "But, while we grant to the religion of the Natives complete toleration, it is not necessary to conceal or compromise our own, or to let it appear to be a matter of indifference to us whether the Natives become converts to truth or not.", page 402
94. "..all schools to which aid is given by the Government the Bible shall be read—not commented upon for its doctrines, but read for its facts.", page 402
95. "..Native converts to Christianity should be admitted to all employments the duties of which they can adequately fulfil. In measures like these there is nothing that ought to excite the suspicion of the Natives, nothing contrary to the most perfect toleration, nothing savouring of proselytism—it is merely an acknowledgment of the religion we ourselves profess. And surely, my Lords, we ought to look forward to the time when, under the providence of God, India shall form no exception to the multitude of countries in which truth has prevailed against falsehood, and the Gospel has triumphed over idolatry and superstition, so that in the end it may appear why a remote country like England should have been allowed to have dominion over the vast territory of India’ (emphasis added).", page 402
96. "They hope the Government will not be ashamed to avow by its acts and in its official documents that it is a Christian Government; that it looks upon Christianity as the best form of religion and the best basis of all civilization; but that, neither directly nor indirectly—by force, bribery, or any other such inducement, great or small—will it endeavour to turn any Native from the religion to which he belongs.", page 406
97. "But we ought to show to the people of India that we wish to give them, not only Christian justice and Christian civilization, but, above all, ultimately the inheritance of Christian truth (emphases added).", page 410
98. "...I for one cannot object to that word being taken in its fullest sense. But if by ‘neutrality’ is secretly meant that there shall be stamped on the English Government and their representatives in India an aspect of entire indifference as to whether this religion or that is to prosper and abide—if by ‘neutrality’ is meant that their characters are to exhibit that happy indifference as to Christianity which shall impress on the heathen mind the conviction that they care not whether they are Christians or heathens, then I believe that such neutrality would be fatal and false to the religion we profess, and that ultimately it would destroy the empire that has been entrusted to us. It seems to me that the distinction is plain and intelligible between making the Indian people feel that we do not by force and fraud, by policy or by violence, interfere with their religious belief, because our own religion teaches us that such interference would be wrong, and impressing them with the conviction that we withhold our interference because we have ourselves no distinct preference for our own faith. One seems to me to be the line of Christian truth, and the other to be the line of a wicked neutrality; and I am only most anxious that nothing should go forth to mar the impression that we do not mean the English Government in India to be ashamed of its Christianity; but that we wish it to make due provision for the supply of the Christian necessities of its own troops and civil servants, because it believes Christianity to be true, and is not afraid in the face of its heathen subjects to show that it believes it to be true, and that it builds its own expectations of its continued prosperity upon the blessing of that God whom it professes to serve.", page 411
99. " Surely it cannot be contended that a Parliament which legally provided (and still does) for the presence of 26 Bishops representing Christianity was a secular Parliament.", page 414
100. "Between 1858 and 1919–1920, a few more Government of India Acts were passed, which built on the basic template of the 1858 Act, apart from representative legislative councils which were constituted under the Indian Councils Acts of 1861, 1874, 1892 and 1909 (also known as Minto–Morley Reforms) and the Government of India Act of 1915. This period also saw the Home Rule Scheme of 1889, which was the first attempt towards securing the right of franchise to Indians and Indian representation in the legislative councils, and the preparation of the Constitution of India Bill, 1895 (also known as the Home Rule Bill), most probably drafted under the stewardship of Lokamanya [[Balgangadhar Tilak]].", page 418
101. "The Bishop of Oxford presented a Petition from Inhabitants of Ham, praying that the Holy Scriptures may not be excluded by Authority from the Government Schools in India.", page 419
102. "Towards stipends of Bishops of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay and the allowances of Archdeacons of the said Presidencies—Rupees 1,05,543<br><br>The allowances of the Archdeacons were in addition to their salaries as Senior Chaplains on the Ecclesiastical Establishments.<br><br>Towards expenses of episcopal visitations—Rupees 15,611<br><br>Towards payments of pensions to Bishops—£1,800<br><br>Towards salaries of Chaplains of Church of Scotland (exclusive of payments to Presbyterian Chaplains attached to regiments which are treated as Army expenditure)—Rupees 94,404<br><br>Grants to religious bodies other than Church of England and Church of Scotland—Allowances to Bishops and Priests of Church of Rome and for upkeep of churches (exclusive of payments to Priests attached to regiments which are treated as Army expenditure)—Rupees 20,122", page 423
103. "For all practical purposes, it could be said that the Government of India Act of 1919 was the first British-made Constitution for India, which provided the foundation for the Government of India Act of 1935. The 1935 Act, in turn, provided the broader framework for the Constitution of independent India, as admitted by the Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar, in the Constituent Assembly Debates.", page 427
104. "We should look on India not as a temporary possession, but as one which is to be maintained permanently, until the natives shall in some future age have abandoned most of their superstitions and prejudices, and become sufficiently enlightened to frame a regular government for themselves, and to conduct and preserve it.’", page 428
105. "...these are the missions, European and American, which in furthering education, building up character and inculcating healthier domestic habits have done work for which India should be grateful.", page 433
106. "When complaints are rife that European commercial interests are selfish and drain the country of wealth which it ought to retain, it is well to remind ourselves how much of, India’s material prosperity is due to European commerce.", page 433
107. "No less is it the duty of Indian politicians to respect the expectations which have been implicitly held out; to remember how India has profited by commercial development which only British capital and enterprise achieved;..", page 434
108. "...that standard was specifically applied in the League of Nations in order to globally advance the Christian colonial consciousness of the West, especially in colonised countries including Bharat, through the medium of national constitutions.", page 438
109. "Therefore, calling a nation ‘civilised’ is a secularised way of labelling it a ‘Christian nation’ or a Europeanised nation that has organised itself on the lines of a nation-state. The literature shows that for non-Christian non-European countries, the path to being treated as a ‘civilised nation’ was obviously more arduous, and therefore they had to effect a fundamental change in their systems to be accepted into this elite European/Western club of nations.", page 440
110. "The negro race has hitherto shown no capacity for progressive development except when under the tutelage of other peoples. The ‘new science’ seemed to substantiate his position. According to many scientists, it is an established physiological fact that the cranial structures of the negro close at an early age, which condition, it has been contended, prevents organic intellectual progress thereafter. Hence, many have denied the capacity of the negro to advance far on the path of civilization.", page 441
111. "That the ‘sacred trust of civilisation’ required ‘advanced nations’ to hand-hold and tutor former colonies (which were referred to as ‘backward’ instead of ‘uncivilised’) so that they could deal with ‘modernity’, a condition distinctly created by the Christian European coloniser, represents coloniality at its peak.", page 447
112. "... ‘The Triumph of Ideals’ speech given by Woodrow Wilson, the then President of the United States, on 7 May 1919, which indicates that he saw the League as an opportunity to showcase the ‘civilised’ world as well as its Christian unity before ‘heathen countries’ so that they look up to the Christian civilisation18:", page 448
113. "All the nations now have to do the same thing; they have to try to apply, far as is possible, Christian principles to international relations—to work for reconciliation, and to make even the peoples that have been alienated feel that they are members of one great community in peace and good will.", page 459
114. "...some may point out that the Vatican was kept out of the League of Nations despite the papacy wanting to be a member of the League. Therefore, they could argue that the League was secular in character. But this would be historically incorrect for multiple reasons.<br><br>First, the Vatican was kept out of the League primarily because Italy resisted its entry fearing that the Vatican would seek return of the territories lost to Italy in the Italian wars of unification. Second, Pope Benedict XV’s attempts at floating the Vatican’s own peace platform after the war, although successful to a significant extent through its ‘Concordat diplomacy’, put him in direct competition with the US President Woodrow Wilson’s attempts to lead the peace efforts. As revealed by a letter from Eugenio Pacelli (future Pope Pius XII), a prominent Vatican jurist of the time, to the Secretary of State to Pope Benedict XV, Pietro Gasparri, it was feared that Wilson’s ‘fourteen points’ peace programme was the brainchild of the Freemasons who opposed Catholicism and ‘supplied the United States with one of the cornerstones of its government, namely the democratic spirit’. In fact, it was feared that Allied victory would ‘Americanise the whole world, making it Freemason so as to liberate it from its servitude to the kaiser, the pope, and the priesthood’. The Vatican’s opposition to the US programme ensured that the UK and France too allied with the US. The third reason for the Vatican’s exclusion from the League is that some of the obligations cast on the members of the League were forbidden by Vatican’s religious beliefs.", page 460
115. "But Russia and Germany in turn planned the conquest of India.<br><br>Few will have the temerity to deny that the present war (WWI) was partly caused by German designs on her. According to The Times of January 23, 1918, the ex-Kaiser is reported to have said: ‘We shall not merely occupy India, but shall conquer it; and the vast revenues that the British allow to be taken by the Indian Princes, will, after our conquest, flow in a golden stream into the Fatherland.’ The loyalty of India, and particularly of the intelligentsia of India, frustrated the German attempts to foment conspiracies. But clearly these external ambitions and internal aspirations render it absolutely imperative to settle Indian problems by enunciating a ‘Monroe Doctrine’ for Asia and Africa, and emancipating India from pupilage and democratizing the Government of India so as to remove rivalries and assure the world that India is governed by the sons of India, for the benefit of India and for the common welfare of all mankind (emphasis added).", page 463
116. "Castes do not divide a nation any more than classes do in England.", page 464
117. "Politically, the whole of India is now practically united, and had been so also in the past, notably in the days of Asoka. But the ancient Emperors of India, more liberal than the modern Tzars or Kaisers, never used force to standardize language, culture, creed or caste, but left each group to self-development suitable to its environments.", page 466
118. "The autonomy we advocate may be briefly sketched as follows: The Peninsula of India should be divided into a number of provinces on the principle of nationality. The Province should administer the internal affairs of the Province and be entrusted with all powers requisite for the administration. The form of government should be democratic. These Provinces should be federated to form the United States of India, with democratic Central Executive and Legislative bodies having powers to deal with the internal affairs of the whole of India. The United States of India should form a unit of the British Commonwealth with equal status with any other constituent thereof... (emphases added).", page 471
119. "Importantly, Rai drew attention to the existence of democratic and republican institutions in Bharat much before the arrival of both the Middle Eastern and European colonisers. As one of the leading lights of the Home Rule Movement, Rai’s distinction between Bharat as a civilisation and Europe’s construct of a nation indicates that at least until 1919, those who fought for this country’s decolonisation, even if gradual, were aware of its roots and had not been fully colonialised. While this may point to the inherent strength of the Indic civilisation, colonial education and its version of Bharat’s history had started showing results, evident from the references to the ‘Aryan race’ and ‘caste’ in Rai’s pamphlet. Therefore, a certain degree of duality had begun to surface in Bharat’s indigenous consciousness, at least by 1919.", page 471