# The Story of the Integration of the Indian States

Created: 23/08/2022 18:44

#book

Source: [[V. P. Menon]] : [[The Story of the Integration of the Indian States]]

## My Thoughts
1. "It must be emphasized.....rise of national consciousness." - Signs of coloniality in his thoughts that the colonisers gave India identity of a united nation!? - but he mentioned political unity and not cultural which might be true ... not sure.
2. ""A definite pattern....theatres of war." - Really? I know that Gandhi promoted the idea of Indians fighting in the World Wars. But were the princely states' rulers also advocates of this move?"
3. "Britain claimed...announcement of 20 August 1917:" - Contrasting language as opposed to the previous highlights where he suggested that India as an entity was formed by the British
4. "The policy...British Empire." - Maybe the British govt. realised that the Indians are colonised enough to slowly give them control of their destiny so that they continue to believe that they rule themselves but in reality the British Christian colonial ideology would rule us all.
5. "The authors...polity of India." - In other words the British realised that these 'slaves' now truly feel that it is their duty to serve the British therefore they were ready to included them into the administration.


## Fleeting Notes
1. "It must be emphasized that' not even in the palmiest days of the Hindu and Moghul empires did the entire country come under one political umbrella. No greater achievement can be credited to the British than that they brought about India's enduring political consolidation. But for this accomplishment and the rise of national consciousness.", page 11
2. "After the disintegration of the Moghul Empire, the only power which seemed likely to step into the breach was the Mahrattas. Shivaji had laid the foundations of a mighty kingdom; but this pioneer of a resurgent Hindu empire had left no competent successor. After Shivaji's death, the Peshwas (chief ministers to the ruler) gradually took over control. In the beginning they showed promise of becoming the rallying force of the great Mahratta Confederacy. But theirs was the story of the Hindu and Moghul empires over again. Intrigue and corruption at the Peshwa's Court and perpetual wars between the Scindia and the Holkar disrupted Mahratta unity. The Mahratta armies were tax-collectors by force and showed no discrimination between the Hindu and the Muslim. The imposition of chauth and sardeshmukhi in conquered areas and the collection of these exactions by the Mulkgiri forces brought upon them the sullen hatred of the people.", page 11
3. "...his greatest contribution was the institution of a policy of subsidiary alliances with the Indian rulers. Under this system, the State accepting subsidiary alliance was to make no wars and to carry on no negotiations with any other State without the Company's knowledge and consent; the bigger States were to maintain armies commanded by British officers for 'the preservation of the public peace' and their rulers were to cede certain territories for the upkeep of these forces; the smaller States were to pay a tribute to the Company. In return, the Company was to protect them, one and all, against external aggression and internal rebellion. A British Resident was also installed in every State that accepted the subsidiary alliance.", page 14
4. "When Wellesley was recalled in 1805 the British dominion had expanded considerably. He had successfully overcome Tippu, whose defeat and death in 1799 removed a major threat to the British Empire. He practically eliminated the French influence in India. Besides, he brought many States under subsidiary alliances, the notable ones being Hyderabad, Travancore, Mysore , Baroda and Gwalior.", page 14
5. "The Indian rulers for the most part, not only remained aloof from the uprising but in certain cases extended active assistance to the British in suppressing it. Lord Canning gratefully acknowledged the role of the States as 'breakwaters in the storm which would have swept over us in one great wave.' 'Where should we have been,' enquired Elphinstone with characteristic frankness, 'if Scindia, the Nizam and the Sikh chiefs etc. had been annexed, the subordinate presidencies abolished, the whole army thrown into one and the revenue system brought into one mould?' The realization that the States could play a vital role as one of the bulwarks of British rule led to a radical change of policy, which found expression in Queen Victoria's proclamation of 1858", page 21
6. "A definite pattern of the Government of India's relationship with the States in all its details had been developed by the time the First World War broke out in August 1914. The rulers rallied to fight for the Empire in its hour of peril, offering both their personal services and the resources of their States. Not only did they help Britain lavishly with men, material and money, but some of them even served as officers in different theatres of war.", page 26
7. "Britain claimed to be fighting a war to defend freedom and democracy; but the system of government by which she continued to hold India in imperial thrall was clearly at variance with her professed aims. The British Government recognized that the situation needed new handling and that there was an imperative and urgent need for a new policy. Accordingly, Edwin Samuel Montagu, the Secretary of State for India, made the historic announcement of 20 August 1917:", page 26
8. "The policy of His Majesty's Government, with which the Government of India are in complete accord, is that of the increasing association of Indians in every branch of the administration and the gradual development of self-governing institutions with a view to the progressive realization of responsible government in India as an integral part of the British Empire.", page 28
9. "The authors of the joint report paid glowing tributes to the princes for the part played by them in the war, which had demonstrated their immense value as part of the polity of India.", page 28
10. "The Chamber of Princes was brought into being by a Royal Proclamation on 8 February 1921. The ceremony of inauguration was performed by the Duke of Connaught, on behalf of the King- Emperor, in the Dewan-i-am of the Moghul Red Fort in Delhi. The Chamber was to be a deliberative, consultative and advisory body. The Proclamation defined its limits: My Viceroy will take its counsel freely in matters relating to the territories of Indian States generally and in matters that affect these territories jointly with British India or with the rest of my Empire. It will have no concern with the internal affairs of individual States or their Rulers or with the relations of individual States with my Government, while the existing rights of these States and their freedom of action will in no way be prejudiced or impaired.", page 33
11. "...therefore the States could not be compelled to transfer to a third party their loyalty to the British Crown. On the question of the limitation of paramountcy, the Butler Committee disagreed with the views propounded by Sir Leslie Scott. The Committee held that the relationship of the paramount power with the States was not merely a contractual relationship resting on treaties made more than a century ago, but that it was a living, growing relationship shaped by circumstances and policy, resting on a mixture of history, theory and modern fact. It was no t historically correct to assume that when the States came into contact with the British power they were independent, each possessed of full sovereignty and of a status which a modern international lawyer would hold to be governed by the rules of international law. In fact, none of the States had ever had international status. Nearly all of them were subordinate or tributary to the Moghul Empire, the Mahratta Confederacy or the Sikh Kingdom, and were dependent on them. Some were rescued by the British and others were created by them. The Committee refused to define paramountcy but asserted that (paramountcy must remain paramount; it must fulfill its obligations, defining or adapting itself according to the shifting necessities of the time and the progressive development of the States.'", page 41
12. "The communal situation by this time had considerably deteriorated and no understanding could be brought about between the two major communities. In January 1940, Jinnah declared that the Hindus and the Muslims formed two separate nations, and that both must share the governance of their common motherland. Three months later, at the Lahore session of the Muslim League, he declared that the Muslim nation must have a separate independent State of Pakistan. In all subsequent discussions on constitutional advance this attitude on the part of Jinnah and the Muslim League was the dominant factor.", page 80
13. "Churchill made it clear however that the proposals which Sir Stafford Cripps was bringing were 'to be accepted as a whole or rejected as a whole.'", page 82
14. "The Cripps offer consisted of two parts. The long-term plan postulated that immediately after the cessation of hostilities a constitution-making body would be set up to frame the constitution of a new Indian Union which would have the full status of a Dominion with the power to secede, if it chose, from the British Commonwealth.", page 82
15. "The first point raised was whether in the event of a number of States not finding it feasible to adhere to the Union, such States or groups of States would have the right to form a Union of their own with full sovereign status. Regarding this Sir Stafford said that personally he did not see any fundamental difficulty in the suggestion but as that situation had not been considered in connection with the present scheme he was not able to give a definite reply.", page 85
16. "H. V. Hodson, my predecessor as Reforms Commissioner, and later I myself, opposed the proposal. Lord Linlithgow accepted our advice and told the Secretary of State that a separate. Union of States was just not practical politics and that it was not worth wasting time considering it. He was emphatic that it would be disingenuous to encourage the States to go on thinking along those lines.", page 92
17. "Finally, on 25 June 1945, Lord Wavell gave an assurance that there would be no future transference of relationship of the States with the Crown to any other authority without their consent, provided the rulers on their part gave the assurance that their consent to any changes which emerged as a result of negotiations would not be unreasonably withheld.", page 98
18. "...an important ruler went to the length of asserting: 'We fought and sacrificed our blood to win power and we mean to hold it. If Congress wants to rob us, if the British should let us down, we will fight.", page 100
19. "The Nawab of Chhatari, representing Hyderabad, reiterated a demand that Hyderabad had made at the time of the Cripps negotiations, for retrocession of the territories ceded to the East India Company, and added a new claim for a free outlet to the sea. Lord Wavell asked him what port Hyderabad had in view. Chhatari said that they had thought of Goa. He added that they would not require a corridor of territory but only an 'easement' to enable them to import by rail across British Indian territory goods received at their own port.", page 108
20. "...on 20 February 1947, Prime Minister Attlee made a declaration in the House of Commons in the course of which he set a date not later than June 1948 by which Britain would transfer power to responsible Indian hands. It was also announced that Viscount Mountbatten of Burma would replace Lord Wavell as Viceroy.", page 122
21. "Lord Mountbatten, the new Viceroy, arrived in India on 22 March and took charge two days later.", page 125
22. "On 28 April 1947, the representatives of the States of Baroda, Bikaner, Cochin, Jaipur, Jodhpur, Patiala and Rewa took their seats in the Constituent Assembly. This was the beginning of the end of the united front put up by the Chamber of Princes.", page 132
23. "It was about this time that Lord Mountbatten announced the plan of 3 June 1947, according to which His Majesty's Government would be prepared to relinquish power to two Governments, India and Pakistan, on the basis of Dominion Status, and this relinquishment of power would take place much earlier than June 1948.", page 135
24. "Lord Mountbatten elucidated the plan next day at a press conference. No fresh ground was covered so far as the States were concerned. But to a question whether it was the intention of His Majesty's Government to confer dominion status on any State which declared itself independent, he replied emphatically in the negative. It was at this conference that he gave the first public indication that the date of 'the transfer of power could be about 15 August 1947.'", page 142
25. "With the announcement of the plan, the Nawab of Bhopal resigned his Chancellorship of the Chamber of Princes. In his letter of resignation he stated: Now that Your Excellency has indicated to us the policy of His Majesty's Government in regard to the future of the Indian States, and Bhopal State would, as soon as paramountcy is withdrawn, be assuming an independent status, I consider it desirable that I should tender my resignation of the office of Chancellor of the Chamber of Princes with effect from today.", page 142
26. "He went on to say that he fully admitted the principle that any State could, if it so wished, join the Pakistan Constituent Assembly; but there was no trace in the Cabinet Mission's memorandum of any State being allowed to claim independence.", page 145
27. "Nehru said that in his opinion this did not signify the possibility of States becoming independent. Sir Conrad said that in his opinion the term 'particular political arrangements' implied relations with autonomous units. Jinnah said that in his view the States were fully entitled to say that they would join neither Constituent Assembly. Every Indian State was a sovereign State. Nehru disagreed with the proposition.", page 146
28. "On 11 June, Sir C. P. Ramaswami Aiyar announced that Travancore had decided to set itself up as an independent sovereign State. A similar announcement was made the next day on behalf of the Nizam of Hyderabad.", page 152
29. "Sardar next referred to the consequences of the lapse of paramountcy. I remarked that it was the greatest disservice the British had done us as well as the rulers. During the course of a century, the provinces and the States had been welded together. The edifice of central authority had rested on two pillars, one with foundations in the provinces and the other in the States.", page 158
30. "The Cabinet Mission had announced the lapse of paramountcy in their memorandum of 12 May 1946. I told Sardar that, though I was Constitutional Adviser to the Governor-General, I had never been consulted on this issue, and that I was unhappy about the decision. At the same time I could appreciate the point of view of the Cabinet Mission. The British public had ever been sensitive about treaties and agreements and the Labour Party might have had the fear that, if it transferred to the successor Government the rights under the treaties entered into by the Crown with the rulers, neither the Conservatives nor the British public would have stood it. Under the Cabinet Mission plan, paramountcy would have lapsed only after the constitution had been set up and power transferred to the successor Governments. Under the June 3rd plan the transfer was to take place on 15 August, and paramountcy was to lapse on that day. There were hardly two months left, and to negotiate agreements with such a large number of States during that time was obviously out of the question.", page 159
31. "When I told Sir Conrad Corfield that the Government of India had decided on the policy of accession, he literally threw up his hands in surprise. He considered the policy of accession far too ambitious and recalled the tortuous and infructuous negotiations with the rulers between 1934 and 1939. 1 pointed out that those negotiations had been conducted in other circumstances by the Political Department but that now in the changed conditions we hoped to succeed. It was made clear to him that, while we would welcome every assistance from the Political Department, the ultimate responsibility of negotiating with the rulers would rest with the new States Department.", page 165
32. "Such criticism was based on complete ignorance of the facts of the situation. No thought had been given to what would be the position of the States on 15 August if there were no accession; the States would be independent and the border States would be at liberty to ally themselves with Pakistan. Further, what would have happened in those troublous days if law and order in any State broke down? These critics did not realize that, by the accession of the States on 'defence', the Government of India secured the right of entry into a State whenever internal security was threatened. Moreover, without an Instrument of Accession the Government of India could not exercise civil and criminal jurisdiction in the semi-jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional estates and talukas — a lacuna to which Sir B. N. Rau had drawn pointed attention when the Indian Independence Bill was on the anvil.", page 185
33. "The critics were completely silenced when Junagadh acceded to Pakistan; they realized then the possibilities of disintegration if the policy of accession had not been implemented.", page 185
34. "Leadership is of two kinds. A leader like Napoleon, who was master of both policy and detail, wanted merely the instruments to carry out his orders. Sardar's leadership was of the second category. Having selected his men, he trusted them entirely to implement his policy. Sardar never assumed that he knew everything and he never adopted a policy without full and frank consultation.", page 187
35. "As if the intransigence of some of the rulers and the inveigling tactics of the League leaders were not enough, it seemed that the Political Department was adding to our worries. That Department had encouraged the Nawab of Bhopal in his efforts to evolve a 'Third Force' out of the States and reports were being brought to me by some of the rulers that they were being instigated not to accede to India. This naturally upset me. I acquainted Lord Mountbatten with what I had heard. I felt that if both Sir Conrad Corfield and myself operated in the same field, it was like trying to walk simultaneously in two opposite directions.", page 187
36. "In a subsequent talk with Sir C. P. I made it clear that an 'agreement' on three subjects would not be acceptable, as other States would want to follow his example. A signature on the Instrument of Accession was absolutely necessary. At first he was adamant, but after a further interview with Lord Mountbatten, he agreed that accession was inevitable. As he had to be back in Trivandrum on 25 July in connection with the death centenary of a former Maharajah of Travancore, a great composer and patron of music, he took with him the draft Instrument of Accession and a personal letter to the Maharajah from Lord Mountbatten, promising to return on 27 July. Before he could do so, a personal attack was made on him and he was wounded. But the Maharajah telegraphed to Lord Mountbatten his acceptance of the Instrument of Accession and Standstill Agreement. This announcement had a distinct effect on other rulers who were still wavering. In the meantime, Sardar appealed to the Travancore State Congress to suspend their campaign of direct action.", page 192
37. "The late Maharajah Hanwant Singh of Jodhpur continued to be intractable. Jinnah and the Muslim League leaders had a series of meetings with him. At the last of these interviews, Maharajah Hanwant Singh had taken the then Maharajkumar of Jaisalmer with him, because the Maharajah of Bikaner would not accompany him and he shrank from going alone. Theirs were the three States geographically contiguous to Pakistan. Jinnah, I was told, signed a blank sheet of paper and gave it to Maharajah Hanwant Singh along with his own fountain pen, saying 'You can fill in all your conditions.' A discussion followed. The Maharajah was prepared to line up with Pakistan. He then turned to the Maharajkumar of Jaisalmer and asked him whether he would follow suit. The Maharajkumar said he would do so' on one condition: If there was any trouble between the Hindus and Muslims, he would not side with the Muslims against the Hindus. This was a bombshell and took Maharajah Hanwant Singh completely by surprise. Sir Mohammad Zafrullah however made light of the whole affair and pressed Maharajah Hanwant Singh to sign the instrument. But the Maharajah now felt unable to take a decision. He suggested to Jinnah that he would go to Jodhpur and return the next day. The Maharajah remained at Jodhpur for three days. The atmosphere in the State was hostile to the idea that Jodhpur should cast its lot with Pakistan; the Jagirdars and nobles were decidedly opposed to it. The Maharajah began to waver. When he returned to Delhi after three days I was informed that, unless I handled the Maharajah quickly, the chances were that he might accede to Pakistan.", page 192
38. "The Maharajah started at once to ask for impossible concessions. I told him plainly: 'If you want to sign on false hopes, I will agree to your demands,' adding that most of the demands could not be conceded. He then told us that Jinnah had given him a blank paper in which he could put down all the concessions he wanted. I urged him not to be swayed by false promises. After a great deal of discussion, I gave him a letter conceding some of his demands. Thereafter he signed the Instrument of Accession. After a few minutes, Lord Mountbatten went out of the room and the Maharajah whipped out a revolver, levelled it at me and said: 'I refuse to accept your dictation.' I told him that he was making a very serious mistake if he thought that by killing me, or threatening to kill me, he could get the accession abrogated. 'Don't indulge in juvenile theatricals,' I admonished him.", page 193
39. "At last the Nawab signed, but with the stipulation that his signature should be kept secret for ten days after the transfer of power. There was no difficulty in complying with this request.", page 195
40. "...within less than three weeks practically all the States concerned had signed the Instrument of Accession and the Standstill Agreement.", page 200
41. "Sir Pratap Singh, Gaekwar of Baroda, was the first ruler actually to sign the Instrument of Accession, though I think the first announcement of accession was made by the Dewan of Gwalior, M. A. Srinivasan, on behalf of the Maharajah, Sir Jivaji Rao Scindia of Gwalior. The latter had been of great help during the negotiations and had undoubtedly exercised a healthy influence on several rulers. But the greatest share of the credit for giving a patriotic lead to the rulers and convincing them that it was in their own interest to accede to India must go to the late Maharajah Sir Sadul Singh of Bikaner and Maharajah Sir Yadavindra Singh of Patiala.", page 201
42. "Junagadh was a Rajput State under the Chudasama dynasty until 1472-73, when it was conquered by Sultan Muhammad Bedga of Ahmedabad. In the reign of Emperor Akbar it became a dependency of the Court of Delhi under the immediate authority of the subah of Ahmedabad. About 1735, when the Moghul Government had fallen into decay, Sherkhan Babi, a soldier of fortune and an officer under the subah, expelled the Moghul Governor and established his rule in Junagadh. The last Nawab of Junagadh was a descendant of Sherkhan Babi.", page 203
43. "The Nawab, Sir Mahabatkhan Rasulkhanji, was an eccentric of rare vintage. His chief preoccupation in life was dogs, of which he owned hundreds. I was told, indeed, that he carried his love for dogs to such lengths that he once organized a wedding of two of his pets, over which he spent a huge sum of money and in honour of which he proclaimed a State holiday! The Nawab had all along been paying lip-service to the ideal of a united Kathiawar. On 11 April 1947, in reply to some speculations in the Gujarati press regarding the State's attitude towards the future constitutional set-up of India, the Government of Junagadh issued a press note which contained the following paragraph: What Junagadh pre-eminently stands for is the solidarity of Kathiawar and would welcome the formation of a self-contained group of Kathiawar States. Such a group while providing for the autonomy and entity of individual States and their subjects would be a suitable basis for co-operation in matters of common concern generally and co-ordination where necessary. This clear statement had set all doubts at rest. On 22 April the Junagadh Government Gazette reproduced a speech of the Dewan, Khan Bahadur Abdul Kadir Mohammed Hussain, in the course of which he categorically repudiated allegations in the vernacular press that Junagadh was thinking of joining Pakistan; that Baluchis and Hurs had been imported into the State forces, and that the local Bahauddin College was to be affiliated with the Sind University.", page 203
44. "Nabi Baksh told Lord Mountbatten, whom he met privately afterwards, that his intention was to advise the Nawab that Junagadh should accede to India. He gave the same impression to the Jam Saheb of Nawanagar and to Sardar whom he met during his stay in Delhi. Early in 1947 the Dewan, Abdul Kadir Mohammed Hussain, had invited Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto, a Muslim League politician of Karachi, to come to Junagadh and join the State Council of Ministers. In May 1947 Abdul Kadir went abroad for medical treatment. Sir Shah Nawaz took over as Dewan. Subsequently, the State Government got rid of Nabi Baksh. The Nawab soon came under the influence of the Muslim League. Both the Jam Saheb of Nawanagar and the Maharajah of Dhrangadhra warned me that with Sir Shah Nawaz in the saddle there was a possibility of Junagadh going over to Pakistan. The Instrument of Accession was sent to the Nawab for signature; when we received no reply up to 12 August 1947, I sent telegrams to the Nawab and the Dewan reminding them that the last date for the receipt of intimation of signing of the Instrument of Accession was 14 August, and requesting an immediate reply. On 13 August, Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto, replied that the matter was under consideration.", page 205
45. "The Nawab replied after a few days: The Indian Independence Act did not and does not require a ruler to consult his people before deciding on Accession. I think we are making an unnecessary fetish of the argument of geographical contiguity. Even then, this is sufficiently provided by Junagadh's sea coast with several ports which can keep connection with Pakistan.", page 211
46. "Lord Mountbatten suggested that the question might be referred to the United Nations Organization, but Sardar was opposed to the idea. He contended that there was a grave disadvantage in being the plaintiff in such cases. Both Nehru and Gopalaswami Aiyangar were also opposed to referring the issue to the United Nations Organization; so the suggestion was dropped.", page 222
47. "Nehru took the opportunity to suggest to Liaqat Ali Khan that Junagadh troops should be withdrawn from Babariawad. Just then a telegram was received that Junagadh troops had entered Mangrol as well. The claim of the Nawab of Junagadh for suzerainty over 21 villages in Mangrol was itself doubtful after the lapse of paramountcy; but there was not even a semblance of justification for the Nawab's action in occupying the entire State of Mangrol. Even so, Nehru undertook not to allow Indian troops to enter either Babariawad or Mangrol until the legal position of both had been definitely established, provided Junagadh troops were immediately withdrawn. Liaqat Ali Khan would not give a definite reply on this point; but he was adamant when it came to the question of Pakistan's right to accept Junagadh's accession. He argued that a ruler had the absolute right to accede without reference to the moral or ethnic aspects of accession.", page 224
48. "Sardar then visited the famous Somnath temple at Prabhas Patan. He was visibly moved to find the temple which had once been the glory of India looking so dilapidated, neglected and forlorn. It was proposed then and there to reconstruct it so as to return it to its original splendour.", page 236
49. "Kasim Razvi, the Razakar leader of Hyderabad, in one of his bellicose speeches said: 'Why is Sardar thundering about Hyderabad when he cannot control even little Junagadh?", page 788
