# The Arts of Seduction

Created: 20/07/2022 15:29

#book #kama-sutra #indian-culture

Source: [[Seema Anand]] : [[The Arts of Seduction]]

## Fleeting Notes
1. "What makes the Kama Sutra stand out from other similar texts is that in compiling the book, [[Vatsyayan]] did what no one had ever done before— he broke the ultimate gender myth. For centuries religious belief had held that a woman did not have an independent source of pleasure, that her pleasure depended on that of the man—in other words, a woman’s orgasm was the result of a man’s orgasm. The [[Kama Sutra]] stated that not only do women have an independent source of pleasure but that a man is not even necessary to the process.", page 9
2. "Men’s desires are like fire, starting at the genitals and moving up to the brain. They are easy to ignite and equally quick to extinguish. They need very little encouragement to arrive at full arousal and are content with instant gratification. Women’s desires are like water, starting at the head and flowing downwards; and like water they take far longer to come to the boil and equally long to cool down.", page 11
3. "..a man who is culturally well informed, the one who can stimulate your mind is the most attractive man of all.", page 11
4. "..we are the only culture in which [[Cupid]] (or Eros) doesn’t have a physical body—he is ananga.", page 11
5. "..as part of the making up, the man is supposed to fall at her feet, and it was forbidden for a man to fall at a woman’s feet outdoors. This law was outlined by the sage [[Dattaka]] who, according to legend, created the rules of etiquette for social and sexual manners to be followed by lovers and courtesans.", page 21
6. "...a common trope in ancient Indian literature and the arts was the ‘girdle of jingling bells’. It was not the norm for a woman to be on top during sex. For her to be on top, she had to be an exceptionally good lover—that is, she had to be good enough to bring herself and her partner to orgasm by only moving her hips. Not the torso, just the hips! And so, the really accomplished courtesans would wear a girdle of ghungroos around their upper waist and make sure that during sex none of the bells made a sound!", page 25
7. "[[Vatsyayan]] begins his chapter on the love codes with a grim warning to men who underestimate the importance of understanding these codes (as opposed to women, who clearly get their significance). He says a man can be rich, good looking and skilled in all the other sixty-three arts of love, but if he has no knowledge of the secret love codes then the woman of his dreams will dump him in the same way that one discards a wilted garland of flowers—in the garbage, without a second thought.", page 25
8. "For instance, Bihari (a seventeenth-century poet) tells us, ‘It was a religious festival. As the priests sit around the prayer fire he (our hero) picks up a lotus flower and looking at her (our heroine) touches the flower to his head. In response she lifts up her aarsi (ring with a mirror in the centre) and catching his reflection as well as the reflection of the sun in it, she puts it to her breast. He smiles and is content.’<br><br>The flower to the head means ‘charan kamal’ or ‘your lotus feet’. A man would only have the woman’s feet on his head after they made love (i.e. they are lovers). When our hero touches the lotus to his head after looking at his beloved, he is begging his lover to meet him that night. When she catches his reflection in her mirror ring, she is agreeing to meet with him. Catching the sun and then ‘placing’ it to her breast signifies that she will meet him after the sun has gone to rest in his mountain home.", page 26
9. "After a night of passion, when the woman sees her lover in the midst of a group of friends, displaying the marks that she has made on him, she is secretly very pleased but will pretend to be very angry with him, accusing him of being unfaithful, insisting that some other woman has left these marks. She will toss her hair and leave the room, but only after she has secretly shown him her own love bites, which he has left on her.", page 37
10. "According to the Kama Sutra , the aim of the man with this first kiss is to make gentle contact with the lips, making the kiss so irresistible that it gradually convinces your partner to prolong it.<br><br>Keeping your eyes open and talking softly, lean in and place your lower lip on your partner’s lower lip with a feather touch. It is what the Kama Sutra refers to as the Nimittaka (or Nominal Kiss). It should be the barest of touches. Now very, very gently rub her lip with yours, with absolutely no force, only enough to make her lip quiver slightly. If this is the very first time you are kissing do not use hands at all. If you have kissed before, then begin by holding her head in place with your hands or curving a strand of her hair around your finger and holding her head in place with the help of that. For the next step (Sphuritaka), give little delicate kisses to her closed mouth like a woodpecker, alternating between the upper and lower lip. Occasionally pause to spend a bit more time at the opening of her lips, but do not force them open.<br><br>The third part of the kiss (Ghattitaka), according to the Kama Sutra , is the response that comes from the partner (but there are no hard and fast rules—either partner can carry on the kiss). However, if you have done it right, by now you should have her quivering with anticipation and, desperate with unfulfilled desire, she will close her eyes and try and hold your lip in hers to stop you from moving away.<br><br>The Kama Sutra says that the woman will feel acutely shy at the thought of her own arousal and so she places one hand over her lover’s eyes and the other over her own and, taking his lower lip in her teeth, she will try to bite it or run her tongue over it. She is so aroused she can no longer contain herself, but is so embarrassed by her lustful thoughts that she covers both their eyes—now the world cannot be witness to her shamelessness. The first flush of passion is better felt than seen. So it is time to shut the eyes and the kiss can be deepened into a bite or you can use the tongue to rub against her lip—but that is as far as you should go. Use all your willpower to restrain yourself even if you or your lover need more. Build it up like you have never done before. The rewards will be fantastic.", page 75
11. "Semen is made up of 60 per cent vitamins and 40 per cent essential minerals—it is the most natural energy booster. In Ancient China, emperors would have their servants collect the semen of healthy young men, which was then mixed with herbs and taken as medicine. In Tantra, there is a position called the Vajroli Mudra in which the man, instead of ejaculating his semen, can be taught to reverse the flow so that not only does his semen get reabsorbed into his own body, but he can suck up the woman’s fluids as well.", page 85
12. "So strong was this belief in the efficacy of fish as an aphrodisiac that men of the British East India Company held that having sex with Bengali women (a fish-eating community) was the only way to beat the unbearable monsoon heat which was known to completely sap people of energy. According to an article that appeared in a London newspaper in the 1800s, the Company men (back in the time of Jahangir) had even applied to the Mughal emperor for permission to have sex with Bengali women during the monsoons—for health reasons.", page 113